{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab360{\fonttbl
{\f0\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}
{\f1\froman\fcharset2 Symbol;}
{\f2\fswiss\fcharset1 MS Sans Serif;}
{\f3\froman\fcharset1 Times New Roman;}
{\f4\froman\fprq2 Times New Roman;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset1 Arial;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset1 Arial;}
{\f7\fswiss Code 39;}
{\f8\froman Times New Roman;}
{\f9\fswiss Arial;}
{\f10\fswiss\fprq2 Arial;}
{\f11\froman\fprq2 Garamond;}
{\f12\fnil Arial;}
}
{\colortbl
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green128\blue0;
\red8\green0\blue0;
}
{\info
{\title ProffittCenter}
{\author This product is released under a GPL licence}
}
\portrait
\paperw12240
\paperh15840
\margl1440
\margr720
\margt720
\margb720
\margmirror
{\header \pard\plain \widctlpar\tqr\tx10080 {\f12\fs20\cf3\b ProffittCenter - EPOS for the twenty first century}{\tab} {}\par }
{\footer \pard\plain \widctlpar\tqr\tx10080 {\f12\fs20\cf0\b ProffittCenter manual copyright Dave Proffitt 2006}{\tab} {{\f12\fs20\cf0\b Page {\field{\fldinst page}{\fldrslt}}}}\par }
{\stylesheet
{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang1031 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s3\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs28 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s4\keepn\tx1200\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s5\keepn\tx1200\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s6\keepn\tx1200\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s7\keepn\tx1200\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 7;}
{\s8\keepn\tx1200\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 8;}
{\s9\keepn\tx1200\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 9;}
{\s10\keepn\tx1200\ul\f6\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 10;}
}
\par Your content page goes here...
\par
\par In MS-Word, select INDEX AND CONTENTS from the INSERT menu.
\par Select CONTENTS and click OK.
\par
\par An index page was added to the end of this document.
\par \page
\par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 1.\tab Basics
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Introduction}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Introduction}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.1.\tab Introduction
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {EPOS}}}{\v{\xe {wholesaler}}}{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {support}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Welcome to the world of EPOS (Electronics at the Point Of Sale), or just plain old POS in the USA.
\par Most retailers will have considered EPOS as an essential step towards an efficient, controlled retail operation. The next decision then is to decide which system. On thinking about priorities, help and maintenance will undoubtedly figure prominently. Cost, although an important consideration, is rarely a deciding factor.
\par Why then, do so many people choose ProffittCenter? There is no simple answer. 
\par If you just want a buy it and forget it EPOS, then buying your preferred wholesaler's choice will seem to suit your needs perfectly. Integration with the wholesaler's head office, twenty four hour support and a helpful team that will set up your product file and do an initial stock take. Of course this service is necessarily expensive, but why not? What have you to loose? 
\par Well cash! The only reason to install EPOS is to make more of it. Even if you are only thinking of saving time, this will equate to money saved. The hard fact is that to save money, and to make more money with EPOS, you have to invest your own time as well as your own money. Lots of it.
\par So the buy it and forget approach without the full commitment of the owner, will necessarily fail. It will cost you money, instead of making you any. Maintaining the accuracy of you database will have to become your major concern from the moment you bring EPOS into your store. How is this different with ProffittCenter and a more go-it-alone approach? Well, you will spend more time getting to grips with your system, but ultimately, this is time well spent. The better your understanding of the program, the greater the benefits. So explore the help files diligently, making sure that you understand every procedure. Clean up erroneous data as soon as you spot it. Regularly keep backups and learn how to repair database errors. 
\par Help is still available, both by email at proffittcenter@gmail.com and on the phone at 01795 581467. The support group at \plain\f4\fs24 http://www.proffittcenter.org (just click on Forums) can also be an important resource, both for answering new problems, and for scanning past problems and their solutions.
\par ProffittCenter has an enviable reputation of responding to retailer's wishes. It is the core of a community of retailers. Retailers who have made the investment in time and are now benefiting from it. Retailers who are thinking like you, but acted sooner; so why not make a start and join them today.
\par 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Whatisabarcode?}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Whatisabarcode?}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.2.\tab What is a bar code?
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {bar code}}}{\v{\xe {EAN13}}}{\v{\xe {EAN8}}}{\v{\xe {UPC}}}{\v{\xe {symbology}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 A bar code is simply a way of encoding characters in a simple machine readable format of black bars, normally printed onto a white background. The characters encoded may be just numbers or both letters and numbers. There are a variety of different codes used to translate between the characters and the black and white bands. These codes are generally known as symbologies. Products in a supermarket are universally coded with an EAN13 or EAN8 symbology. EAN is for the European Article Numbering Association, and the 13 or 8 refers to the number of digits (numbers only) encoded. In America, the equivalent standard is UPC for Universal Product Code and is broadly similar. EAN13 codes can also have an extension code added. These are commonly used for issue identification with magazines.
\par Bars in the code are distinguished by their width; normally a choice is made between two widths, one unit or two units wide. 
\par There are a large number of other codes available, but the main additional one of interest is code 39. This is used by this program for any bar codes that are printed out. These are printed with a free bar code font provided by Bar Codes, Inc. at http://www.barcodesinc.com/free-barcode-font/ . You are free to use these fonts in other applications. For instance, you might wish to generate bar code labels with a spread sheet program, such as Excel. Any number represented in code 39 needs to have a * character both before and after the number as start and stop codes. That is, if you want a number 1003456, you need to have the string of characters *1003456* printed in the Code 39 font. To see how this works, \plain\f7\fs24\cf0 *1003456* \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 is the same string in the Code 39 font. These need to be printed with a high quality printer; ideally a high resolution laser printer, although success can be achieved with an ink jet printer. A dot matrix printer is not suitable.
\par 
\par \pard\qc\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 {\field{\*\fldinst{INCLUDEPICTURE "clip0002.bmp" MERGEFORMAT}}}
\par \pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 It is common practice to print the number that is coded below the actual bar code as this makes it possible to enter a code manually if the scanner fails to read it successfully.
\par The machine readable part is satisfied by an optical system together with a unit that converts light signals into an electrical signal. There are two main ways of doing this. 
\par The bar code can be illuminated, and then an image of the bar code is converted by a device that is similar in principle to a video camera, except that it only scans a single line, instead of a rectangle. These sensors are based on CCD (charge coupled device) technology and hence the scanners based on them are known as CCD scanners. The illumination is provided by a set or LEDs (light emitting diodes) and such scanners are often recognised by the pulsing red light that they give off. Red is chosen for illumination, as this is the most sensitive part of the spectrum for the normal silicon based CCD devices used.
\par The other approach used is to scan the bar code with an intense moving beam of light, and to detect the reflected light with a simple photodetector. The intense beam of light is provided by a solid state visible laser, normally red. These devices are robust and have a long life. The power in the light beam is insufficient to cause eye damage, although looking into the beam is not recommended. The effective intensity is high because the laser light is monochromatic, allowing much of the ambient light to be removed by a simple filter before detection. The beam is scanned with a mechanical system of rotating or nutating mirrors, either along a straight line, or in a complex two dimensional pattern for an omni-directional scanner. The use of a mechanical system makes such scanners less rugged overall, but they have the advantage of high readability and fast acquisition. They can read bar codes at a distance, including the larger case codes, and are far less dependent upon the actual distance that the bar code is from the scanner, as image focusing is not involved. Most types will scan continuously or will start scanning when presented with an object at the scanning aperture, allowing hands-free operation. They are generally the preferred option for retail use, but are not the cheapest option. They can be recognised by the sharp red line, or pattern of lines, emitted when in operation.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_FREESOFTWARE}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_FREESOFTWARE}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.3.\tab Why free software
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {support}}}{\v{\xe {free}}}{\v{\xe {guarantees}}}{\v{\xe {GPL}}}{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {feedback}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Common questions asked are "Why is the software free?" and "If the software is really free, what guarantees do I get?"
\par The software is free because it was originally written just for use in our own small shop, and then we offered it to other retailers to let them share in the benefits, without any immediate thought of profit. For this, the program had to be slowly upgraded to a more professional standard with such extras as full help files, installation routines, etc. Distribution led to the need for a web site. The costs involved have meant creating a business around the product, making a profit from the sale of hardware. We hope that you will purchase the hardware from us so that we can continue to provide the service, but it is not required that you purchase anything to use the program.
\par The guarantees provided with commercial software are strictly limited. All software licenses attempt to take away the right to a refund in any circumstances and accept no liability for consequential damage. New enhanced versions are normally charged for at the full, or a substantial upgrade cost.
\par Most, but not all, firms will offer installation support for a limited period. After that, all support is charged for, normally on an annual basis. If for any reason a firm stops trading, or sometimes if it just drops the product line, any support will normally cease.
\par The guarantee supplied with free software under the GPL license makes no additional promises, but at least you are assured of your money back if it is not suitable! The license also provides for access to the source code. This can mean that support can continue, even if the supplier ceases to provide it, provided that others take up the programming challenge. This has happened with other software products released under the same license, and I strongly hope that it will eventually happen with ProffittCenter. Upgrades, whether small bug fixes or substantially enhanced versions will always be free to download. This in turn means that support only has to be tailored to the latest download.
\par We do provide free e-mail support at \plain\f4\fs24\cf1\ul proffittcenter@gmail.com\plain\f4\fs24  for all users of the program. This has been a helpful form of feedback for us and has led to many improvements being made to the program. Coping with the flow of e-mails has not been a problem to date. In fact, the numbers of e-mails has decreased, as initial problems have been ironed out.
\par We now have a web based discussion group, at www.proffittcenter.org , (just click on Forums on the website) so post your questions there or browse the answers to other people's questions. Subsequently you can all lend a hand in helping newcomers overcome their initial hurdles.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Licence}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Licence}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.4.\tab Licence
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 ProffittCenter is released under the GPL or Open Source licence. This means that you are free to copy the program and distribute it as long as you include the source code, or make this available to a third party. The same applies if you modify the program. You may not release the program or a modified program under a more restrictive licence.
\par The help files are copyright, but the original distribution includes this. This means that you are free to use and distribute the help files, but may not derive other works from them, such as printed manuals, without permission of the author.
\par The full terms of the GPL licence are given below. You will be asked to agree to its terms when you install the program.
\par 
\par \plain\lang1033\f4\fs24 The Open Source Definition, Version 1.0
\par Open source doesn't just mean access to the source code. The distribution terms of an open-source program must comply with the following criteria:
\par Free Redistribution 
\par The license may not restrict any party from selling or giving away the software as a component of an aggregate software distribution containing programs from several different sources. The license may not require a royalty or other fee for such sale. 
\par Source Code 
\par The program must include source code, and must allow distribution in source code as well as compiled form. Where some form of a product is not distributed with source code, there must be a well-publicized means of downloading the source code, without charge, via the Internet. The source code must be the preferred form in which a programmer would modify the program. Deliberately obfuscated source code is not allowed. Intermediate forms such as the output of a preprocessor or translator are not allowed. 
\par Derived Works 
\par The license must allow modifications and derived works, and must allow them to be distributed under the same terms as the license of the original software. (rationale)
\par Integrity of the Author's Source Code 
\par The license may restrict source code from being distributed in modified form only if the license allows the distribution of "patch files" with the source code for the purpose of modifying the program at build time. The license must explicitly permit distribution of software built from modified source code. The license may require derived works to carry a different name or version number from the original software. (rationale)
\par No Discrimination Against Persons or Groups 
\par The license must not discriminate against any person or group of persons. (rationale)
\par No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor 
\par The license must not restrict anyone from making use of the program in a specific field of endeavor. For example, it may not restrict the program from being used in a business, or from being used for genetic research. (rationale)
\par Distribution of License 
\par The rights attached to the program must apply to all to whom the program is redistributed without the need for execution of an additional license by those parties. (rationale)
\par License Must Not Be Specific to a Product 
\par The rights attached to the program must not depend on the program's being part of a particular software distribution. If the program is extracted from that distribution and used or distributed within the terms of the program's license, all parties to whom the program is redistributed should have the same rights as those that are granted in conjunction with the original software distribution. (rationale)
\par License Must Not Contaminate Other Software 
\par The license must not place restrictions on other software that is distributed along with the licensed software. For example, the license must not insist that all other programs distributed on the same medium must be open-source software. (rationale)
\par Example Licenses 
\par The GNU GPL, BSD, X Consortium, and Artistic licenses are examples of licenses that we consider conformant to the Open Source Definition. So is the MPL.
\par Bruce Perens wrote the first draft of this document as "The Debian Free Software Guidelines," and refined it using the comments of the Debian developers in a month-long email conference in June, 1997. He removed the Debian-specific references from the document to create the "Open Source Definition."
\par GNU General Public License
\par Table of Contents
\par * GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\par +Preamble
\par +TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
\par + How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
\par GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
\par Version 2, June 1991
\par Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 59 Temple Place--Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA
\par Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
\par Preamble
\par The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This General Public License applies to most of the Free Software Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it. (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by the GNU Library General Public License instead.) You can apply it to your programs, too.
\par When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.
\par To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.
\par For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights.
\par We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and (2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the software.
\par Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free software. If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original authors' reputations.
\par Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents. We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the program proprietary. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.
\par The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow.
\par TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
\par This License applies to any program or other work which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed under the terms of this General Public License. The "Program", below, refers to any such program or work, and a "work based on the Program" means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term "modification".) Each licensee is addressed as "you". 
\par Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Program (independent of having been made by running the Program). Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.
\par You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License along with the Program. 
\par You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.
\par You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions: 
\par You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change. 
\par You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this License. 
\par If the modified program normally reads commands interactively when run, you must cause it, when started running for such interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this License. (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on the Program is not required to print an announcement.) These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program, and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this License, whose permissions for other licencees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it. 
\par Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or collective works based on the Program.
\par In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the scope of this License.
\par You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following: 
\par Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or, 
\par Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or, 
\par Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer to distribute corresponding source code. (This alternative is allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you received the program in object code or executable form with such an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.) The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it. For an executable work, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the executable. However, as a special exception, the source code distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable. 
\par If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place counts as distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source along with the object code.
\par You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance. 
\par You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Program or its derivative works. These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Program or works based on it. 
\par Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to this License. 
\par If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not distribute the Program at all. For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the Program. 
\par If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances.
\par It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of the free software distribution system, which is implemented by public license practices. Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that choice.
\par This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the rest of this License.
\par If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the original copyright holder who places the Program under this License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License. 
\par The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. 
\par Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and "any later version", you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.
\par If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally. 
\par NO WARRANTY
\par BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. 
\par IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 
\par END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
\par How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
\par If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these terms.
\par To do so, attach the following notices to the program. It is safest to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.
\par One line to give the program's name and an idea of what it does. Copyright (C) 19yy name of author
\par This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
\par This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.
\par You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place--Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
\par Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.
\par If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this when it starts in an interactive mode:
\par Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) 19yy name of author Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type "show w". This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions; type "show c" for details.
\par The hypothetical commands "show w" and "show c" should show the appropriate parts of the General Public License. Of course, the commands you use may be called something other than "show w" and "show c"; they could even be mouse-clicks or menu items--whatever suits your program.
\par You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if necessary. Here is a sample; alter the names:
\par Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the program `Gnomovision' (which makes passes at compilers) written by James Hacker.
\par Signature of Ty Coon, 1 April 1989 Ty Coon, President of Vice
\par This General Public License does not permit incorporating your program into proprietary programs. If your program is a subroutine library, you may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the library. If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Library General Public License instead of this License. 
\par FSF & GNU inquiries & questions to gnu@gnu.org. Other ways to contact the FSF.
\par Comments on these web pages to webmasters@www.gnu.org, send other questions to gnu@gnu.org.
\par Copyright notice above. Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place--Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111, USA
\par Updated: 16 Feb 1998 tower 
\par 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Internationalisation}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Internationalisation}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.5.\tab Internationalisation
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Some effort has been made to internationalise ProffittCenter. The currency symbols are set in the Settings screen. Note that there is a symbol or symbols for the main currency such as \'a3 in the UK and also one for the penny (in the UK). (That is, in the USA $ and c.) Unfortunately, ProffittCenter will not work for very low value currencies as the maximum cash tender is \'a315000 ($15000 etc.).
\par The text in all of the screens and in messages can be changed, and this has been done for many language. We have put in automatic translation into some languages using Google translate. If your language of preference is not covered, let us know.
\par Finally, there is the use of English in help files. This is unlikely to change without international help in re-writing them. This would be a much bigger job.
\par We hope that this does not put you off from trying out the program. We currently have registered users in Ireland, Netherlands, USA, Phillipines, Sri Lanka, South Africa and many more. We would love to increase this list.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_taxregimes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_taxregimes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.6.\tab Tax regimes
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {tax}}}{\v{\xe {settings}}}{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {sales tax}}}{\v{\xe {registered trader}}}{\v{\xe {unregistered trader}}}{\v{\xe {wholesale trader}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 ProffittCenter is in use throughout the world. To ensure compatibility with the differing tax regimes in use, it is necessary to look at how different sales taxes are levied, and to set up ProffittCenter accordingly. The tax regime in use is specified in the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul settings\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen. Before rushing to choose an appropriate setting, please note that in the absence of any sales taxes, it is still necessary to specify a zero rated tax to apply to all products. The options for tax regime fall into two groups: the simpler sales taxes, and the various value added tax formats. We will explain these separately below.
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b No tax: \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 this setting is selected when the country of use has no sales taxes. Leave a record for one sale tax of zero for filling in the stock record for every product and another for rentals, or service charges, again with a zero rate.
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b Sales tax:\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  this setting is used for countries for a sales tax levied on all retail sales. The assumption is that wholesale supplies will have no tax levied. Set up one tax record with the desired rate. If there are any exempt products, then a separate zero rate is required. The tax is applied to a complete bill as a separate charge. All product prices exclude this tax. The net takings figure will include all sales but will exclude any sales taxes.
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b VAT:\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  This is value added tax, used in the European Union. It differs from a sales tax because the tax is applied to supplies at wholesale price, and this tax paid may then be offset against the tax charged on goods sold. The tax is thus charged on the addition cost of goods, that is the added value. There are three separate cases to consider. 
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b Registered trader: \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The normal situation of a registered trader, who charges the correct tax on all of their sales but the retail price of items includes these taxes. The net tax is not displayed to the customer, and is not shown on the receipt. Product prices include any tax due, but net takings exclude these taxes.
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b Unregistered trader: \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 traders whose annual turnover is less than some specified amount do not have to collect VAT. As they still have to pay VAT on their purchases, and cannot reclaim this element, not all tax is lost to their government. In ProffittCenter it is necessary to set the correct tax code for each product, so that the correct prices are recorded for wholesale prices, and margins, etc.
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b Registered wholesale trader:\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  these are registered traders with a main customer base are other registered traders. Prices of goods are always shown exclusive of VAT, and the tax due is shown on the screen and on any receipt. Product prices are recorded exclusive of VAT. The net takings figure excludes tax.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_MAIN}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_MAIN}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.7.\tab Main
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {keyboard}}}{\v{\xe {F4}}}{\v{\xe {F2}}}{\v{\xe {Num Lock}}}{\v{\xe {Caps Lock}}}{\v{\xe {screen}}}{\v{\xe {guest}}}{\v{\xe {operator}}}{\v{\xe {agency}}}{\v{\xe {PayPoint}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The keyboard should be set up with Caps Lock off and the Num Lock on. The screen should be set to a resolution of 1280x1024 pixels for optimum layout. On starting off, log in as the default operator. The correct code will appear in the data entry box at start-up. Type in your own operator code, when you have one, followed by the enter key. 
\par You are now ready to start selling!\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_START}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_START}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.8.\tab Starting off
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {settings}}}{\v{\xe {starting off}}}{\v{\xe {barcode}}}{\v{\xe {returns}}}{\v{\xe {wastes}}}{\v{\xe {own use}}}{\v{\xe {video member}}}{\v{\xe {rental}}}{\v{\xe {Temp A}}}{\v{\xe {Temp B}}}{\v{\xe {departments}}}{\v{\xe {supplier}}}{\v{\xe {cigarettes}}}{\v{\xe {confectionery}}}{\v{\xe {product}}}{\v{\xe {temporary}}}{\v{\xe {defaults}}}{\v{\xe {stocktaking}}}{\v{\xe {ordering}}}{\v{\xe {How do I get started?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Initially, a blank database will be installed. Log in and use the number '10000370000' as a password.
\par First enter the required entries in the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Settings\plain\f4\fs24 ' screen. Then set up the operators of the system. It would be better to give users higher numbers and incorporate these into bar-coded passes. When this has been done, the initial operator can be downgraded to trainee, but make sure that at least one operator has an authority of zero.
\par The menu selection '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul File|Print bar codes\plain\f4\fs24 ' will print out a set of six bar codes that can be attached to the operator side of the monitor to use for returns, wastes, own use, video member, charged and received on account.
\par Next, set up the departments to your liking. The existing departments can be deleted or modified provided that no sales have been entered. Retain the Rental department for rentals, and the Temp A and Temp B departments. Another recognized department is Agency. This was used for the receipt of PayPoint monies, but might be used for any money received that does not form part of the trade's takings. Aim for between ten and twenty departments in total. 
\par Finally, the key supplier details should be added to the supplier database. If for any reason it is necessary to start again, just use the menu command File\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul  | \plain\f4\fs24 Database | \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Replace with empty database\plain\f4\fs24 '. \plain\f4\fs24\ul 
\par \plain\f4\fs24 The system can then be used, but it may be wise to add the most commonly sold products (such as cigarettes and confectionery in a convenience store) first using the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Starting stock\plain\f4\fs24  screen. 
\par For each new product encountered, a description and price have to be entered immediately to complete a sale. Additional details can be added if there is time. If a department is selected and a price entered, and the stock entry left blank, a '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New stock dialog\plain\f4\fs24 ' will be shown. 
\par However, if the department is left blank, the product is considered a temporary product. Later, using the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Starting stock\plain\f4\fs24  menu item, the department and stock details are added. These details should include default supplier and default case size. These defaults will be used later to generate the first orders.
\par After a few days, new products will be rarer. At this stage, all of the stock details can be added at the point of sale if desired, and if time allows. At this stage, stock taking should be started as a routine activity. Use the menu item \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Stock take |All\plain\f4\fs24 . Later, it is preferable to use the alternative, \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Stock take |All < 10\plain\f4\fs24  menu selection, as this avoids counting large numbers of items, which tends to introduce more errors than it eliminates.
\par After about three weeks, the ordering system can be brought into play.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_settings}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_settings}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.9.\tab Settings
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {logo}}}{\v{\xe {receipt printer}}}{\v{\xe {shelf label}}}{\v{\xe {messages}}}{\v{\xe {company}}}{\v{\xe {cheque}}}{\v{\xe {password}}}{\v{\xe {How do I customise the program for my shop?}}}{\v{\xe {printer}}}{\v{\xe {Star}}}{\v{\xe {Com 1}}}{\v{\xe {Com 2}}}{\v{\xe {Epson}}}{\v{\xe {cash drawer}}}{\v{\xe {jotter}}}{\v{\xe {guillotine}}}{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {Notepad}}}{\v{\xe {How do I set it up for my company?}}}{\v{\xe {tax regime}}}{\v{\xe {Cash Limit}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Settings screen is reached by activating the menu entry \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul File |Settings\plain\f4\fs24  and requires that the operator has owner or manager privileges. This screen is also displayed at start-up if no database is found. It will normally be the first screen encountered after installing the program. If you have not installed MySQL via XAMPP, freely available from the "Apache Friends" website, then do this first. 
\par The Settings screen is divided into three separate tabs: server, hardware, and shop. 
\par 
\par The \plain\f4\fs24\b\i Server\plain\f4\fs24  tab holds all the required settings for connection to a database (MySQL). First there is the server name, the database name, the MySQL user name and password. The default for these are localhost (for a server running on the same computer), till, root and blank. These need to match your own setup of MySQL. For an online database, we have (for example) www.proffittcenter.org, proff2_till, proff2_test, and the password, which needs to be entered twice. 
\par The backup gmail address and Gmail password are for the automatic backing up of the database. Fill in your own gmail email address (including @gmail.com) and the gmail account password, and every time the program is closed on the machine with the server running, an email will be sent to your Google email account with an attached sql file. This can subsequently be run to reconstruct the database if something should go wrong. If you do not have a gmail account they are free from google.com and currently hold 7.5 GB of data. The program will work without this information, but for safety, always back up you data.
\par The gmail address can be your normal address, or one specifically created to hold these emails. If it is your normal address, then set up a filter to move these emails directly to a separate backup folder, skipping the inbox. This will ensure that they are archived and thus save some space, as well as keeping your inbox clear.
\par If you do not provide an email address it is essential to make alternative provision for backing up the database on a regular basis.
\par \plain\f4\fs24\b It is always necessary to click the 'Test connection' button before the main 'OK' button is enabled. 
\par \plain\f4\fs24 If an empty database engine is found, additional buttons will be enabled on the Server page to install the database, and then install tables, and these must be clicked in turn, before proceeding to the main OK button.
\par 
\par The \plain\f4\fs24\b\i Hardware\plain\f4\fs24  tab hold values for a specific hardware setup. Select an available port and then click the 'Test' button to see if the connection works. The code table and select font drop down box can be set as required. Here, in the UK, the UK setting, and the Page 19 (PC858 EURO) setting proved useful. Click 'Touch screen' if you want to use that facility. The 'Invoice printer' is for the use of an attached Windows printer instead of a receipt printer. (Not reccomended)
\par 
\par The \plain\f4\fs24\b\i Shop\plain\f4\fs24  tab hold values specific to a particular shop, such as shop name and address. Note the pound and penny symbols: insert your own for local currency. Select the character set Cp850 for a start. 
\par The tax regime for the UK, the choice is between unregistered (for VAT), registered and wholesale registered. The difference is that for wholesale, selling prices are quoted excluding VAT, and the VAT is added to the total. For retail, VAT is included in each price.
\par Then, there is a check box 'Receipt always' and 'Print receipt if greater than:'. Check this if you want a receipt to be issued for all transactions, or increase the value from zero if you want printed receipts for larger transactions only. You can always print receipts on demand by  pressing the 'Print Screen' key.
\par Set 'Autoclear in minutes' refers to the locking of the sales screen if left for an extended period. Set the value to zero if you do not want this feature.
\par The 'Float value' allows for a fixed float to be set. Leave this at zero and you will be asked to enter the float for the shift.
\par Till ID should be zero for the back office, and any low number for sales stations.
\par Unchecking the Newproduct? box will disable the creation of new product in the sales screen.
\par The checkbox labeled Close computer after saving will do what it says. When the database has grown, somewhat, the time taken to save the backup file can be tiresome, particularly in a late closing shop. Ticking this can allow you to leave the shop minutes earlier. Make sure other programs are closed down first.
\par 
\par Remember, if changes are made on any page, it is necessary to click the OK button which will save the changed values. The program will then shut down and needs to be re-started.
\par To set up with an online database, the following may be helpful.
\par I use Lunar hosts as my provider, using CPanel.
\par In CPanel click on MySQL databases. Then click Create Ne Database and fil in database name.
\par 
\par Then create a user:
\par 
\par Then add user to the database you created:
\par 
\par When you click on Add, you get a chance to grant privaleges for this user's account:
\par 
\par Having made a note of all the relavent valuse, go to File>Settings on the Server tab:
\par 
\par Then the normal process will create the database and empty tables.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_customermessages}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_customermessages}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.10.\tab Customer messages
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 All messages shown on the pole display, and on receipts*, are displayed in the Customer messages screen in the File menu. The right hand column entries can be changed to suit the language and use of the owner. Press the Enter key to update the message, and the OK button on completion.
\par 
\par * Work in progress\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Touchscreen}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Touchscreen}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.11.\tab Touch screen
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {Settings}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 To use the program with touch screen hardware, tick the box enabling the touch keyboard in the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Settings\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen. The small numeric keypad can be used to input numbers and some required characters into the input. If the % key is touched when the data entry is blank, an alphabetic screen is made visible, so that such items as product descriptions can be entered. The blank key on the alphabetic screen will hide this screen again.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Operatorpassword}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Operatorpassword}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.12.\tab Operator password
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {password}}}{\v{\xe {1004}}}{\v{\xe {operator}}}{\v{\xe {settings}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Operators are logged into the sytem by scanning into the salescreen, or at othe times into an Operator password dialog.
\par Before new operators have been created for the system, log on by typing 10000370000 followed by the Enter key, into the sales screen. The number 10000370000 will appear in the entry at start up. When operators have been created, this default operator can have it's priority set to lock.\plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Printbarcodes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Printbarcodes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.13.\tab Print barcodes
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 This option under the File menu entry causes a print out on the default printer of a set of bar codes that can be placed adjacent to the monitor for convenience at the point of sale. 
\par \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 \tab \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Productcodes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Productcodes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.14.\tab Product codes
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {received on account}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 ProffittCenter makes use of a number of special codes, or numbers, to implement functions such as \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul received on account\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  or \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul own use\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 . A consequence of this is that these numbers may not be used for products. This is no problem if product Bar codes are used, as all legal EAN or UPC Bar codes are acceptable; but it does need to be considered if product codes are created for your own use.
\par Small numbers, up to 129,999 are interpreted as a cash tender (i.e. \'a31299.99), so these numbers may not be used. 
\par Ten digit numbers that begin with \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000030 to 1000039 are used internally and should not be allocated as product codes. To allow for some further extensions, this range of restricted numbers should be extended to a maximum of 1000399999.\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par The numbers \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000001 to 1000026 are interpreted as \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul hot key\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 s, product codes generated by pressing a single character on the keyboard. These are legal codes, but you should be aware of their interpretation.
\par See the section on \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul 10000 codes\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  for details of invented bar code for internal use.\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_updatingtheprogram}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_updatingtheprogram}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 1.15.\tab Updating the program
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 ProffittCenter is open source which has the particular advantage that program updates never add to the cost of ownership. This means that you benefit from the constantly improving program and its developments. Installing the latest version will have no effect on the database, which is a separate program (MySQL).  Just download the latest version periodically, and then install as you did the first time around. There is no need to uninstall before doing this. The 'jasper' files located in ProffittCenterReports are not overwritten. This is so that you can modify these files using the open source iReport program, and your modifications will not be overwritten. You might need to do this to get a different layout of invoices. If on the other hand, you find one of the reports lacking, just delete the particular jasper files and on install, they will be replaced by the latest version.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 2.\tab Quick start
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_firststeps}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_firststeps}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.1.\tab First steps
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Many users are somewhat daunted by the size of the help files, so the following pages have been added so that an initial sale can be completed with little or no prior knowledge. Once you have followed these simple steps a few times, you will be able to dip into the help files with other, more complex issues, such as deliveries, orders, accounts, etc.
\par Before starting you need to install \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul XAMPP\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 . If you have not done this already, download XAMPP via the Internet from the Apache Friends website. Make sure that MySQL and Apache are running as a service by looking at the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul XAMPP\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  control panel. Start these services, and ensure that they start on startup, if they are not currently running.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_xampp}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_xampp}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.2.\tab XAMPP
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 XAMPP is a combined package for installing MySQL, the Apache web server, and certain other useful programs. Download the package from the Apache Friends website at http://www.apachefriends.org/en/xampp.html, and chose the XAMPP for Windows package. Install this and select the option Install as a service when asked.
\par The first time you start ProffittCenter Pro, you will be presented with the Settings screen. Enter the desired fields for user name and password and then click the Test button on the lower left.{\field{\*\fldinst{INCLUDEPICTURE "Test button.bmp" MERGEFORMAT}}} If the MySQL database is available, the Create database button will be enabled, but if not, a warning message will be given. The most probable reason would be that the MySQL database is not running, so start the XAMPP Control Panel:
\par {\field{\*\fldinst{INCLUDEPICTURE "XAMPP Control.bmp" MERGEFORMAT}}}
\par Click the two Svc boxes for Apache and MySQL and then click the adjacent Start buttons, and then, when the two services are running successfully, close the control panel, and try ProffittCenter Pro again.
\par Then click the Create database button. The Create tables button will be enabled. Click this, and after a further delay, the OK button will be enabled. Click this to start.
\par You can go back later and enter other values into the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Settings\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Yourfirstsale}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Yourfirstsale}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.3.\tab Your first sale
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {EPOS}}}{\v{\xe {unrecognised product}}}{\v{\xe {import table}}}{\v{\xe {hotkey}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Log in by typing 10000370000 followed by the Enter key when the program starts. (Conveniently, this number is already sitting there, ready for you to just press the Enter key.) This will log you in as the default operator. Then press the letter 'i' followed by the Enter key. The letter i is a \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul hotkey\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 . The system will issue an error beep for an unrecognised product. Repeat pressing the letter i followed by the enter key a second time. This time, the wording next to the data entry box changes to 'Enter a description...'. By forcing the operator to enter a code twice, ProffittCenter avoids the creation of a new product when a bar code is only partially read or miss-read. Type in a description of the product you want associated with the letter i, for example 'ice pole', and press the Tab key. Descriptions are automatically capitalised, so that 'ice pole' becomes 'Ice Pole'. The caption changes to 'Enter price in pence ..'. As a general rule, all prices are entered in pence (or your local smallest currency unit, such as cents), just as they would be on a cash register.
\par Now, after pressing the Tab or Enter key again, the first ever item will be shown as sold on the screen, and a sales total will be shown on the right.
\par \plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Sellingmorethanone}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Sellingmorethanone}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.4.\tab Selling more than one
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Now, let us increase the number of items sold from one to five. Type *5 followed by enter, just as you might on a calculator. The number sold will increase to five. (Note, that this is not really like a calculator as if we follow this action by typing *4, the quantity will become 4 and not 20) You can also increase this by one more just by pressing the Enter key; the quantity will increase by one each time you do this, just like on your present cash register. You could also combine two steps into one by typing i5  followed by the Tab key, to save time.
\par Additional products can also be sold. Try typing p20 for 20p worth of penny sweets, and follow the same steps to create a new product as before.
\par 
\par \plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_PayingForIt}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_PayingForIt}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.5.\tab Paying for it
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {cheque}}}{\v{\xe {coupons}}}{\v{\xe {credit card}}}{\v{\xe {debit card}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Now to accept payment! Assume that the customer offers one pound in payment. Type 100 followed by Tab key. Money values are always entered in pence, with ProffittCenter. The money is accepted, and the change calculated. Your first sale is completed.
\par You will also be able to accept full or partial payment by \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul credit or debit card\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 , or with money off \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul coupons\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 .
\par 
\par \plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Makingaproductpermanent}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Makingaproductpermanent}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.6.\tab Making a product permanent
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 When we entered new products in the sales screen, we created a temporary product, saving time when a customer is waiting. After your first rush of sales, it is time to make this temporary product into a more permanent one. Temporary products are just products that are assigned to the temporary, default department.
\par To convert this temporary product to a permanent one, click on the menu selection, Stock|Temp stock.
\par The first temporary product is shown.
\par Using the mouse, drop down the department combo box and select a department. There are no departments at present other than the Default one for temporary products. This time we first need to create a department for our new product. Press the Escape key to clear the screen and the select Tables|Departments for a list of available departments. Click the New button and fill in the details, tabbing between fields. Leave the default minimum at 0. Create an entry for a department to hold Ice Cream products, with Standard Rate Tax. When you are done, click the OK button. Press the Escape key to clear the Departments screen, as before.
\par Now go back to Temp Stock., and this time, select this new department for Ice Poles, leaving the SKU (Stock Keeping Unit) entry blank. The new SKU screen is displayed. There can be more than one product linked to the same SKU.
\par Entries for the new stock dialog have been filled in from the defaults for the department chosen. The stock quantity is zero, but this can be changed if you wish to reflect the true stock level.
\par The default settings for the ice cream department are for standard rate items (UK). If we need to change the VAT, use the drop down box. When this has been done, click the OK button with the mouse, or simply use the Tab key to step to the OK button and then press the Enter key. Then press the Enter key again to accept the remaining product screen. If there are any more temporary products, these will appear, one by one.\plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Goingfurther}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Goingfurther}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 2.7.\tab Going further
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Now that we have rushed through a sale or two - feel free to do more, or add further products either using different hot keys or typing or scanning in the full bar code for any available product - it is time to explore the system a bit more. 
\par Try deleting a product sale before it has been paid for: just press the delete key if it is the last item sold, or if not, select the desired line with your mouse before pressing delete.
\par Select the menu item Tables, and then choose Products to see the stored products so far. 
\par Now press the escape key to dismiss this form, and select the Tables|Sales|All menu selection, to examine past sales.
\par Now try a stock take screen, say the menu selection Stock|Stock take|All, and you will see a list of products needing a stock checked. Any items entered today will not appear, as it assumed that the correct stock level was entered when you created the product entry. The stock level for any item can be amended by double clicking on the stock quantity column, and over typing.
\par Feel free to examine further aspects of the system. Try selecting Reports|Takings and clicking the Calculate button to see the takings so far today! Business is looking good. And so is your shop. Your customers are impressed, and you have the right tool to give yourself the full control you need, and have been waiting for, to progress your business still further.
\par Spend your time getting to know ProffittCenter Pro and all of its many features. You will be rewarded handsomely, in increased profits and reduced losses.
\par ProffittCenter Pro - more than just a pretty face.
\par 
\par \plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 3.\tab Hardware
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_hardware}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_hardware}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 3.1.\tab Hardware
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {CCD}}}{\v{\xe {receipt}}}{\v{\xe {receipt printer}}}{\v{\xe {cash drawer}}}{\v{\xe {Internet}}}{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {printer}}}{\v{\xe {computer}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The minimum hardware requirements are a standard PC with a processor speed of 300MHz or greater, with keyboard, monitor, simple sound system and mouse; and a standard ink jet printer, for reports. 
\par To this, you should add a laser hands free scanner, to read in the bar codes. Choose one with a USB interface. CCD scanners are a cheaper option, but can be tedious to use in practice, as they need to be held at the correct distance from the bar code, and generally require a trigger button to be pressed which precludes hands-free operation. They are unsuitable for reading the larger case codes used in the delivery screen.
\par Most practical situations would require the addition of a receipt printer and cash drawer. We recommend a serial thermal receipt printer, which is fast, quiet and can include an automatic paper cut-off mechanism. Cash drawers attach to an outlet at the back of the receipt printer. An ink jet printer will still be required for reports. A receipt printer is required to print off lists for stock counting.
\par A customer pole display is a useful addition. One with 'pass-thru' for a serial receipt printer is required.
\par There is no need to locate and install Windows drivers for your receipt printer or scanner, as they are not used by the program. Supported printers are selected in the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul settings\plain\f4\fs24  screen, reached from the file menu. Set the printer and pole display to ESC/POS emulation. The drive program is included within the program.
\par If buying a computer, choose a processor speed of at least 1GHz and with the current low memory prices, at very least 2GB of RAM. A hard disk needs to be at least 20GB and preferably 100GB. A 19-inch LCD monitor is recommended. A CD R/W drive is definitely desirable for backups or a memory stick can be used.
\par An Internet connection is needed for updates to the program and for e-mail support or for accessing an online database. Future extensions with exciting possibilities may require access to the Internet. 
\par We can supply extension kits to convert your existing computer or complete turnkey systems, pre-loaded with ProffittCenter for maximum convenience. See the web site at \plain\f4\fs24\cf1\ul www.proffittcenter.org\plain\f4\fs24  for the latest prices.
\par The program is developed to run on Windows XP but should run on other operating systems. The installer is windows specific. Try WebStart or download the jar file for other operating systems.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Seconduserequipment}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Seconduserequipment}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 3.2.\tab Second-hand equipment
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {second-hand}}}{\v{\xe {receipt printers}}}{\v{\xe {dot matrix}}}{\v{\xe {thermal}}}{\v{\xe {code 39}}}{\v{\xe {3 of 9}}}{\v{\xe {EAN}}}{\v{\xe {UPC}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Having acquired free software, some retailers have built successful systems using only second-hand equipment for the ultimate in a low cost approach. There is little to fault with this approach. Much of the equipment available has years of useful life left, and there is a steady supply of equipment, due to shop closures and liquidations. (EPOS didn't stop them failing!)
\par Receipt printers are available with either dot matrix or thermal mechanisms. Dot matrix types are noisier and will occasionally need a new ribbon, whereas thermal printers need special, but readily available paper; but both are usable. Interfaces are currently serial, or parallel, but USB is available on newer units. The program can accept either serial or parallel. USB may present a problem. The program can accept Epson ESC/POS standard. Other widths can be catered for by adjusting the characters to a line setting in the settings screen. Printers are often set up by internal dip switches. To test current settings, press and hold the Form Feed switch while switching on the printer and it should print out a test strip together with information that will show the settings. A printer manual can often be downloaded from the Internet, but in the absence of this, you could try adjusting switch setting by trial and error. A serial printer should be set to 8 bits, no parity, dtr/dsr, 9600 baud and one stop bit. Note that you will require a serial printer cable and not a null modem cable.
\par Scanners can be keyboard wedge, (a Y-shaped lead that sits between computer and keyboard,) serial, or USB interface. See the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul section\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  on setting up a serial scanner. If the scanner works for your products, fine. If not, you may need to re-program it. First locate the manual on the Internet, and print it. If your scanner is too old to be supported, download a later scanner by the same manufacturer and try using that one. Scanners are programmed by scanning special bar codes printed in their manual. You need to program it to read type 39 codes (or 3of 9) and the various EAN and UPC codes on offer. Default settings are commonly acceptable, but changing such things as inter-character delay can be helpful.
\par Cash drawers are generally compatible, and plug into the back of the receipt printer. Make sure that you have the correct lead, as they are not too readily available. 
\par New equipment is also to be recommended. New receipt printers will have a drop in facility for paper; this is very useful if you have a customer waiting for a receipt. ProffittCenter can supply recommended compatible equipment so visit the web site at www.proffittcenter.org for current hardware prices. \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Serialscanners}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Serialscanners}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 3.3.\tab Serial scanners
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {serial scanner}}}{\v{\xe {keyboard wedge}}}{\v{\xe {XP}}}{\v{\xe {How do I use a serial scanner}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\li720\fi-360\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Many people have access to a serial scanner instead of a keyboard wedge or USB type. This procedure will enable such a scanner to be used. The procedure shown below is for Windows XP.\plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par \plain\f11\fs24 1.\tab Go to Start -> Settings -> Control Panel -> Accessibility
\par 
\par 2.\tab Select the General tab, tick Support Serial Devices
\par 
\par 3.\tab Click Settings, select Com Port (normally Com1, but try others if necessary)
\par 4.\tab Select 9600 baud
\par 
\par 5.\tab Accept these changes
\par 6.\tab With XP only, in Classic view, Go to Start -> Settings -> Control Panel ->User Accounts and then
\par 7.\tab Disable Fast User Switching
\par 
\par \pard\plain\f11\fs24 8.\tab In XP we have found it necessary to have log-in enabled, even if there is only one user.
\par 
\par Windows vista and windows 7 do not have this feature any more so use the free utility ACC KEYS which can be downloaded from http://www.aacinstitute.org/Resources/ProductsandServices/aackeys.html
\par 1)Download a file and save it somewhere where it will not be deleted as it doesn't have an installer.
\par 2)Double click on file, set com port to which scanner is connected and set baud rate to whatever your barcode is set to (usually 9600 is ok)
\par 3) Tick an option to run on startup
\par 4) if all is well scanner should work now, if not make sure that you selected correct port and baud rate for your scanner\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Laptop}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Laptop}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 3.4.\tab Laptops
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {laptop}}}{\v{\xe {USB}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 A laptop may also be used to run the system. This has the immediate advantage of being able to continue working after a power failure. It also leads to a compact counter-top solution.
\par We would recommend a USB scanner and serial printer. A single line scanner should be able to run off the laptop's power supply. The receipt printer will require mains input, but it will be possible to continue working without receipts. The parallel or USB port can be used for connection to a report printer. A second display may be connected for customer use, mirroring the laptop's screen. This can also be achieved with a television screen with the appropriate connecting leads.
\par Some changes have been made to accommodate the limited keyboard of a laptop. In particular, the .n instead of *n for a multiplier avoids the use of the shift key. Some users have added a USB numeric keypad for convenience.
\par If your laptop lacks a serial port, you can experiment with a USB to serial converter.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_LAYOUT}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_LAYOUT}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 3.5.\tab Layout
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {keyboard}}}{\v{\xe {cash drawer}}}{\v{\xe {sales screen}}}{\v{\xe {parallel}}}{\v{\xe {printer}}}{\v{\xe {How do I build a system?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 You can arrange the monitor on the counter, at right angles, so that both the sales assistant and the customer can view the sales screen at the same time. This should be to the right of the salesperson, with the standard keyboard positioned on the left. This will ensure that the numeric keypad, with all the most commonly used keys, is easy to reach. The cash drawer can be used as a base on which the monitor and receipt printer can be placed. The laser scanner stand should be attached to the counter adjacent to the cash drawer. The computer, in a tower case, can be placed within the counter, below the cash drawer. The cash drawer is similar in size to a standard cash register.
\par It will be necessary to drill some holes for the cables. Typical cable lengths are video: 1.5m, serial receipt printer: 2m, parallel printer cable: up to 3m, scanner: 1m. The connection from the receipt printer to the cash drawer is short \endash  0.5m. The telephone connection can be easily extended to reach the computer with standard telephone extension cables. 
\par A pole display is advised. We prefer the pass-trough variety. ESC?POS is the standard interface.
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 4.\tab Database
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_database}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_database}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 4.1.\tab Databases
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {TEMPA}}}{\v{\xe {product}}}{\v{\xe {temporary}}}{\v{\xe {empty database}}}{\v{\xe {VAT}}}{\v{\xe {department}}}{\v{\xe {TEMPB}}}{\v{\xe {video}}}{\v{\xe {agency}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 When starting with an empty database, it is necessary to create some entries before the system is of any use. Products are created on the fly by the sales screen, but if not defined at the time, they are created with a temporary SKU assignment, Default.
\par To make record creation simpler, some entries are left in the empty database, such as VAT rates, and Departments. These can be modified, deleted and added to as required, but it is important that this is done before adding stock and product records. Once a record is referred to by one of these, it can no longer be deleted. The Stock database is left with two entries called Default and TempB for temporary assignments to zero rated and standard rated stock. The first entry is required by the system and should not be deleted. The Department database is set up with departments. These can be deleted or modified, but three must remain. These are Default', Video and Agency. Agency covers money taken for a third party such as PayPoint. The program uses these three.
\par Similarly, once a sales record refers to a product, the product can no longer be deleted.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_REPAIR}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_REPAIR}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 4.2.\tab Repairing a damaged database
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {damage}}}{\v{\xe {index}}}{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {repair}}}{\v{\xe {alias}}}{\v{\xe {restore}}}{\v{\xe {How do I repair a damaged database?}}}{\v{\xe {cashing up}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 There are occasions when databases get damaged. This usually means that the various indexes are no longer in step with the data in the table. In most cases, the damage can be recoverable. There are many free tools available to perform this work with a MySQL database. You should investigate these before committing many hours to creating data.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_IMPORT}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_IMPORT}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 4.3.\tab Importing a database
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {csv}}}{\v{\xe {comma separated values}}}{\v{\xe {format}}}{\v{\xe {spreadsheet}}}{\v{\xe {barcode}}}{\v{\xe {product}}}{\v{\xe {price}}}{\v{\xe {new product}}}{\v{\xe {How do I bring in data from another system?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Accessed from the File menu, this allows data to be imported from ProffittCenter Solo. The data will be as coma separated values - a CSV file. 
\par The Solo version has an option to export the database as a csv file using File|Database|Export to Pro. To import a file in the Pro version, select File|Import and then locate the file, normally in the My Documents folder.
\par After selecting the file to be imported using the conventional File Open Dialog, the file is automatically read in. The process can take some time to complete. Sales data is not imported.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_backingup}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_backingup}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 4.4.\tab Backing up
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Facilities are built into ProffittCenter to back up the MySQL database to an online server over the Internet every time you shut down ProffittCenter on the computer with the server running on it. In the Settings screen are two entries: Backup email address and Backup password. The backup email address and password are just the values for a gmail account which may be your own or one you have created just to hold your backups. The files will have the name 'tillDumpxx.sql where xx is the numeric day of the month. Do not switch off your computer until the backing up is complete. This may take some time. Subsequently, a log file of any errors is saved locally in My Documents/ProffittCenter Reports. This is not dated, so only one file will be available when you look.
\par If you need to restore the database at any time, download the latest backup file from your gmail account, and then run the sql file using phpmyadmin, or other database management tool. (I always use the free version of Navicat)
\par An alternative and somewhat easier backing up solution is now provided. Just install the free  software, and everything will be taken care of.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 5.\tab Sales screen
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_salesscreen}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_salesscreen}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.1.\tab Sales
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {scanner}}}{\v{\xe {laser scanner}}}{\v{\xe {barcode}}}{\v{\xe {multiple}}}{\v{\xe {delete}}}{\v{\xe {lay away}}}{\v{\xe {training}}}{\v{\xe {price encoded}}}{\v{\xe {10000 code}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24\b For normal sales operations:
\par \plain\f4\fs24 Type or scan the product code followed by the Tab or Enter key (a laser scanner can automatically append a tab to scanned bar codes when correctly set up). [Unknown products will need to be scanned twice to avoid accepting fragments of bar codes as product IDs. After the second entry, the label next to the entry box will change to 'Enter description...' ]
\par 
\par \pard\qc\plain\f4\fs24\b Or
\par 
\par \pard\plain\f4\fs24 Type a \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul hotkey \plain\f4\fs24 followed by the Tab or Enter key, or for multiple products, type the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul hotkey\plain\f4\fs24  followed by the number to be sold and then the Tab or Enter key
\par \pard\qc\plain\f4\fs24\b 
\par Or
\par 
\par \pard\tx284\plain\f4\fs24 Type any three or more letters \endash  a list of product descriptions will appear in the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Alpha Lookup\plain\f4\fs24  screen, containing words starting with these letters, one of which can be selected with a left click of the mouse or the up and down arrow keys followed by the Enter key. The word entered does not have to be the first word of the description
\par \pard\qc\tx284\plain\f4\fs24\b 
\par Or
\par 
\par \pard\plain\f4\fs24 Type '10000'  followed by a four digit 10000 code to sell items identified by a four digit code applied with a pricing gun.
\par  
\par The last product sold can be deleted by pressing the delete key.
\par To delete the sale of a product that is not the last item on the sales screen, select the item by the use of the up and down arrow keys, or using a mouse, and then press the delete key. After an item has been selected, the quantity may be modified by entering\plain\f4\fs24\b  '\plain\f4\fs24 *n' or '.n' followed by the Enter key or by pressing the Enter key alone to increase the quantity by 1. After these operations, the line selected will return to the last line of the sale.
\par To delete all of the items in a sale with one operation, simply hold the shift key down when pressing the delete key.
\par 
\par \plain\f4\fs24\b Price encoding\plain\f4\fs24 
\par Price encoded products are handled correctly, both for existing products and for new products that are entered.
\par 
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Multiplesales}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Multiplesales}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.2.\tab Multiple sales
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24\b To sell multiple identical products\plain\f4\fs24 :
\par Sell a single product as normal and then type \plain\f4\fs24\b *n\plain\f4\fs24  or \plain\f4\fs24\b .n \plain\f4\fs24 and then the Enter key, where n is the number to be sold. The value of n can be negative for refunds (return to stock). 
\par \pard\qc\plain\f4\fs24\b Or
\par \pard\plain\f4\fs24 Type \plain\f4\fs24\b n\plain\f4\fs24  and then scan a single product where n is the number to be sold and n is in the range 2 to 9. 
\par \pard\qc\plain\f4\fs24\b Or
\par \pard\plain\f4\fs24 Press Enter on its own after a product sale to increase the number of products sold by one.
\par 
\par The number of any products sold, when incorrect, can be corrected by selecting the line first if it is not the last line and then typing \plain\f4\fs24\b *n\plain\f4\fs24  or \plain\f4\fs24\b .n\plain\f4\fs24  followed by the Enter key, where n is the correct number to be sold.
\par \plain\f4\fs24\b Negative sales\plain\f4\fs24 
\par To sell a negative quantity (i.e. to accept back stock that has been previously sold) just type a minus followed by Enter after the initial sale. Note that pressing the Enter key subsequently will increase the number by -1 - that is if we have a sale of -1 items and then press the Enter key again, there will be -2 items sold. Another way of accomplishing the same effect is to type \plain\f4\fs24\b -\plain\f4\fs24  (minus) before scanning the product bar code. If a product returned, is not fit for resale, proceed in the same way, but subsequently '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul waste\plain\f4\fs24 ' or '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul return\plain\f4\fs24 ' the product as a separate sale.
\par \plain\f4\fs24\b Finally\plain\f4\fs24 
\par The operation of the sales screen initially seem complicated by the large number of ways of achieving the same result; each operator is free to choose whichever method seems easiest at the time. There is provision for a training mode by creating an operator with an authority of '5'. With this operator using the machine, no sales are recorded so that the operator is free to practice using the different methods of operation.
\par 
\par 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_hotkey}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_hotkey}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.3.\tab Hot Key
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {hot key}}}{\v{\xe {PayPoint}}}{\v{\xe {VAT}}}{\v{\xe {barcodes}}}{\v{\xe {greengrocery}}}{\v{\xe {penny sweets}}}{\v{\xe {weight}}}{\v{\xe {count}}}{\v{\xe {product}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Any single letter key in the range 'a' to 'z', (or, alternatively, letters in the range 'A' to 'Z',) are used to ease entry for common products. Products sold by weight or count, such as greengrocery or penny sweets, can be assigned to a hot key with a price of one penny. The letter 'a' key is allocated for zero rate VAT sales and the letter 'b' key to standard rate VAT sales. The letter 'u' key is allocated to Agency sales such as PayPoint and the letter 'l' key to late videos.
\par The letter a or A is converted into a code of 1000001 and the letter z or 'Z' to 1000026, with appropriate values for intermediate letters. Hot keys are created, just as other products, by using these numbers instead of Bar codes.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_10000code}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_10000code}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.4.\tab 10000 Codes
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {10000 code}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 With products without Bar codes, it is convenient to use a pricing gun to label them with a four-digit code. As the code alone would be interpreted as a cash tender, 10000 is put before to the code for data entry. Reference to "10000 codes" is a convenient mnemonic to remind staff of the need to enter 10000 first. 
\par If a new product is to be created with a '10000' code, enter the full code as a product ID, which includes the initial 10000.
\par The new product screen has a button that will assign an unused '10000' code.
\par In the sales screen, press the # key to fill in the 1000 preamble for the 10000 code.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_priceover}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_priceover}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.5.\tab Price Over
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {manager}}}{\v{\xe {owner}}}{\v{\xe {authority}}}{\v{\xe {@}}}{\v{\xe {price over}}}{\v{\xe {offers}}}{\v{\xe {discount}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This feature allows an operator to vary the price at the point of sale. The item is sold in the normal way. Then enter the at symbol, @, (or alternativle, the character =, which avoids the use of the shift key,) followed by the price in pence. The selling price is adjusted for the current or selected line only. The price of the product in the product table is \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\b not \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 changed. Any items sold subsequently will be at the original price, even during the current sale. \plain\f4\fs24\cf0 If an offer is in use on the product, then it will not apply to a priced over item. \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 If only one item of several is to be reduced, then it needs to be on a separate line, so deal with it first..
\par There is interaction between price over and \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul discount\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 . See this section for details.
\par \plain\f4\fs24 This operation is restricted to those with the manager or owner authority. If the operator does not have authority, a dialog box is displayed and an owner/manager can scan their pass to allow the price over.
\par The maximum price that can be entered as a price over is \'a31200. The price may be increased as well as reduced. The need for this might arise if you were to use the program to keep track of auction sales in addition to shop sales.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Discounts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Discounts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.6.\tab Discounts
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {discount}}}{\v{\xe {%}}}{\v{\xe {offer}}}{\v{\xe {manager}}}{\v{\xe {owner}}}{\v{\xe {authority}}}{\v{\xe {priced over}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 A discount can be offered on the last item scanned, or any selected item, by typing the percentage discount followed by the % symbol \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 (or alternativle, the character /, which avoids the use of shift key,) \plain\f4\fs24 followed by the Enter key. For example; a ten percent discount is achieved by just entering 10%! \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 If offers are in affect on the discounted product, then any change due to the offer will not be applied to a discounted item.  If only one item of several is to be discounted, then it needs to be on a separate line.
\par If a whole bill is to be discounted, prior to accepting a tender, hold down the shift key when pressing enter. So for 10% discount type 10% and press shift/Enter and ten per cent discount will be applied to each line of the bill.
\par If a discounted item is subsequently \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul priced over\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 , the discount will be maintained on the item. So an item at \'a310 with at10% discount will sell at \'a39. If this item is subsequently priced over at \'a35, the 10% discount will be applied to this price, making it sell at \'a34.50. \plain\f4\fs24 These operations are restricted to those with the manager or owner authority. If the operator does not have authority, a dialog box is displayed and an owner/manager can scan their pass to allow the discount.
\par 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_alphalookup}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_alphalookup}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.7.\tab Alpha Lookup
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {alpha lookup}}}{\v{\xe {stock take}}}{\v{\xe {product modify}}}{\v{\xe {shelf label}}}{\v{\xe {How do I find a product by name?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 In all locations where a product bar code is expected, entering three or more characters will bring up the Alpha Lookup screen. For this to work, all characters have to be alphabetic characters. The Alpha Lookup screen will show a list of matching product descriptions. Entering more characters can further restrict the search. It is not necessary to type in the starting characters of the first word, as the match is performed of each word in the product description. So typing bleach may result in a list including 'HS Bleach 1l', 'HS Thick Bleach 1l', Domestos Bleach 1.5l' and Bleach, Value 1l.
\par Products can be selected with the mouse or by using the up/down arrow keys. The typed description will then be replaced by the product bar code. The last column contains a single digit, 0 to 9. If this digit is pressed, that line will be selected. If there are more than ten lines, the remainder are not numbered.
\par Each line of the display contains a retail price. This allows for the correct selection of products with identical descriptions but different prices. The next one to the end of the line, after the product description, shows the number in stock. It is often the most convenient way of checking the current stockholding, from the sales screen; useful for answering customer requests. Pressing Escape will abort the lookup, afterwards. The product code (barcode) is also shown to distinguish similar products.
\par Products that have their 'StockType' set to Stop are not included in the selection shown. This is a useful feature to remove products that are no longer sold from the alpha display.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Pennyitems}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Pennyitems}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.8.\tab Penny items
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {greengrocery}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Multiple items priced at 1 penny (UK) are treated slightly differently to others. Say we have the key g set as a hotkey for all greengrocery sold, each sold at 1p, and we enter g35 to indicate that greengrocery worth 35p has been sold. This is then displayed as 1 item at 35p rather than 35 items at 1p. If we subsequently try to modify the number sold, say be pressing the enter key to increase by one, the number sold will increase to two at 35p. This representation is not restricted to hotkeys; any product priced at 1p will be treated the same way. This change was made as customers were sometimes confused by the unmodified display. The use of the penny and the pound in these discussions, does not mean that the facilities are limited to just this currency. ProffittCenter is an international program.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Zeropriceitems}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Zeropriceitems}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.9.\tab Zero price items
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {zero}}}{\v{\xe {price encoded}}}{\v{\xe {fish}}}{\v{\xe {price entry}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Items that have a zero price recorded cause a Price Entry dialog to be displayed, when sold. This does not change the price of the product permanently; just for this sale. Such items can be used for goods which are counted for stock control, but which do not have a fixed price. Loose cut cheese would be an example. Price encoded bar codes are a better solution, where this is possible. Another example would be live (aquarium) fish which are charged for depending on their size. Bar codes are not practical, here.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_trackeditems}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_trackeditems}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.10.\tab Tracking
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {Tracked department}}}{\v{\xe {'Customers'}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 There is a need to track the sale of certain items. A common example is a mobile phone, which can be returned months after an initial sale. It is necessary to be able to identify when a particular phone was sold and to whom. Each phone has an individual barcode (or id code to be typed) and this must be somehow be attached to the sale.
\par To track an item, the item must first belong to a '\plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Tracked department\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 '. On scanning the item, the first step is display the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul 'Customers'\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  table to select a customer or add a new one. Then the items individual id is scanned (or typed) and this is saved when the sale is completed.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_priceencoding}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_priceencoding}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.11.\tab Price encoding
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 There is not a universal standard for price encoded barcodes but it is hoped that what has been implemented will be suitable for most applications. When creating a new product with the 'New Product' screen, if the barcode \plain\f3\fs24\cf0\i might \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 be a price encoded barcode, there is an drop down box labeled 'Encoded' that can select one of three options:
\par \pard\li200\fi-200\tx200{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent200{\pntxtb\'b7}}\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Normal\plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Price encoded\plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Weight encoded.\plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par \pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Choose the correct setting and in the case of 'Weight encoded' , enter the price per kg in the price box. For 'Price encoded', the price will be set to 0.
\par When the product is subsequently scanned, the correct price will be shown.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_multipacks}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_multipacks}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.12.\tab Multipacks
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 There is sometimes a need to have multi packs and single packs linked to a single SKU. If this is not done, then it is necessary to book out the multipack and treat the individual items as a fresh delivery each time a multipack is split.
\par Let us for example consider Stella cans sold singly at \'a31 each. You could also sell whole cases (24 cans) at \'a322 a case. The case would be recognised by the case barcode. We are not discussing offers here. The singles and cases are treated as different products being sold at different prices. What we require is for the stock level of Stella cans to be reduced by 24 every time a case is sold.
\par This is achieved by changing the multipack quantity from its' default value of 1 to 24 in the New Product dialog. As this makes no sense, unless the product is linked to an existing product, a link must also be made in the Sku drop down box before this can be effected.
\par Note that when stocktaking, it is now the number of cans of Stella that will be counted, even if cases are listed.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Tracking}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Tracking}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.13.\tab Tracking
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {!}}}{\v{\xe {alpha lookup}}}{\v{\xe {tracking}}}{\v{\xe {mobile phones}}}{\v{\xe {tracked department'}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 In some situations, it is necessary to track the customer name for certain purchased items. An example of this would be the sale of mobile phones, each individually identified by a serial number. If one is later brought back for repair, the customer name can be entered, and the details of the sale recovered, allowing the serial number to be checked, and the date of purchase.
\par Products to be tracked are distinguished by being in a '\plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul tracked department'\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 . To ensure that the product can still be identified by the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul alpha lookup\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  process, the ! should be separated from the rest of the description by an additional space.
\par When a tracked product is sold, there is a beep and the customer screen is displayed. If the customer is already on record, the appropriate record is clicked prior to clicking on the OK button, or simply double clicked. If the customer is not on record, clicking the OK button, or pressing the enter key, will bring up the new customer screen, so that details can be entered.
\par Once this is done, a screen is displayed for entry of the item code, and then the OK button clicked to complete the sale. When the sale is completed, information is stored in the sales table for later use.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_restrictedproducts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_restrictedproducts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 5.14.\tab Restricted products
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Product can be restricted either by setting an age limit or by a 'phamacist only' requirement. A restriction is set in place by imposing the restriction on the department the product is in. For age restrictions, set the age in the restriction field of the department - i.e. 18 for a minimum age of 18. For pharmacist only put a letter p in the field.
\par When a restricted product is sold, a question is asked via the screen, and the operator responds with a 'y' for yes. Any other key press is treated as a no and the sale is not completed.
\par If an age related product is sold, the system wi;ll not ask again for the same customer.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 6.\tab Tenders
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_cashtender}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_cashtender}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.1.\tab Cash tender
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {cash}}}{\v{\xe {tender}}}{\v{\xe {returned}}}{\v{\xe {1000 codes}}}{\v{\xe {refund}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24\b Making a cash tender\plain\f4\fs24 
\par To enter cash tendered, type in the amount in pence followed by the Enter key. All values up to 1000000 (\'a310,000) are treated as cash. 
\par If it is found necessary to exceed this limit, press the shift key at the same time as pressing the Enter key.
\par If cash is to be returned to a customer after a \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul refund\plain\f4\fs24 , type 0 (zero) followed by the Enter key.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_DEBIT}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_DEBIT}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.2.\tab Debit
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {debit}}}{\v{\xe {credit}}}{\v{\xe {cash back}}}{\v{\xe {How do I accept payment by Debit card?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Debit and credit cards may be accepted in payment of a sale by pressing the function key 'F5' or by selecting Payment|Debit with the mouse. A minimum amount of \'a35 by default, or to the value set in the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul settings\plain\f4\fs24  screen, is required. If this condition is not met, then a warning message is displayed.
\par \pard\li1440\fi-1440\tx1440\tx2000\plain\f4\fs24 {\field{\*\fldinst{INCLUDEPICTURE "DebitWarning.bmp" MERGEFORMAT}}} 
\par \pard\plain\f4\fs24 The dialog that appears shows the total to be paid. Stepping on to the next entry by pressing Enter moves to the Cash back drop down box. This may be activated by left clicking the mouse or by using the Down Arrow key. Cash back of 5, 10, 15 or 20 is allowed. Remember that cash back is not allowed with credit cards. When your separate PDQ or other terminal accepts the card, press Enter twice more to accept the payment. Pressing Escape aborts the payment method.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst{INCLUDEPICTURE "DebitDialog..bmp" MERGEFORMAT}}}
\par On-line processing is not implemented yet.
\par Debit or credit card payment is not acceptable for PayPoint or other agency payments if these form a part of the sale. This restriction, and the minimum transaction value, can be overridden by pressing the shift key while selecting the debit payment option on the menu bar with the mouse, if the operator has owner or manager authority.
\par There is no minimum set for refunds on debit or credit cards.
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_COUPONS}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_COUPONS}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.3.\tab Coupons
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {coupon}}}{\v{\xe {milk token}}}{\v{\xe {expiry}}}{\v{\xe {How do I accept money off coupons?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Coupons may be scanned at the point of sale or can be entered manually by pressing the 'F7' key. Scanning will enter the correct monetary value but the expiry date still needs to be checked manually. Coupons with an undefined value, such as milk tokens, will bring up a screen for the true value to be entered.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Splittenders}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Splittenders}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.4.\tab Split tenders
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 It is possible to do split tenders, such as part payment by debit card, and part by cash. In all cases, the cash tender should be the last entry.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_refunds}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_refunds}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.5.\tab Refunds
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {wastes}}}{\v{\xe {returns}}}{\v{\xe {refunds}}}{\v{\xe {exchange}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 If a customer brings back an item for a refund and it is decided to repay the customer, then type a minus sign '-' and then scan the item. Alternatively, the item can be scanned first and then the minus sign pressed followed by the Enter or Tab key. Every item in a sale can be returned at one go by typing - (minus) followed by the Enter key whilst holding the Shift key down. The amount to be paid will be shown as negative, indicating a refund. Entering a zero followed by the enter key will then open the cash drawer. All operators can perform this action. Refunds can be performed as part of a sale, if desired, such as when items are exchanged. After these operations are complete, the item will have been returned to stock. If the item is not fit for resale, it is set aside, and at a later stage, it is \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul wasted\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 , or \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul returnable waste\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 , as appropriate. 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_wastes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_wastes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.6.\tab Wastes
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {wastes}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Wastes are products that are not fit for sale. When a product is wasted, the stock levels are adjusted.
\par To '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Waste\plain\f4\fs24 ' stock, when products are not fit for sale, first sell the items \endash  multiple products or different products can be wasted at one time \endash  and then scan the waste bar code or type \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000031\plain\f4\fs24  and the Enter key to complete the sale. \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 A keyboard shortcut of ? enters the number 100003; add a 1, followed by Tab to create the code for waste. 
\par \plain\f4\fs24 
\par See also \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul returns\plain\f4\fs24 .
\par \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 The bar code for wastes can be printed out using the \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul print bar codes\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  option.
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_returnablewastes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_returnablewastes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.7.\tab Returnable wastes
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {returns}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Returnable wastes are products that are not fit for sale but for which a full credit may be claimed from the manufacturer. When products are returned, the stock levels are adjusted.
\par To '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Return\plain\f4\fs24 ' stock, when products are not fit for sale but will subsequently be credited by a supplier, sell as normal - multiple products or different products can be wasted at one time - and then complete the sale by scanning the returnable wastes bar code or type \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000032\plain\f4\fs24  and the Enter key. \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 A keyboard shortcut of ? enters the number 100003; typing a 2 followed by Tab completes the code for return.\plain\f4\fs24 
\par \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 The bar code for returns can be printed out using the \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul print bar codes\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  option.
\par Refunds can be in cash or debit/credit card.
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Ownuse}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Ownuse}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.8.\tab Own use
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {takings}}}{\v{\xe {own use}}}{\v{\xe {operator}}}{\v{\xe {owner}}}{\v{\xe {net}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 For products taken for the retailer's own use, sell as normal, and then scan the own use bar code or type \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000036\plain\f4\fs24  followed by the Enter key. Own use purchases are charged for at cost in the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul takings\plain\f4\fs24 , and no payment is expected to be made. The operator must be the owner.
\par Own use purchases are assigned to a particular customer, who, to distinguish him from other customers, has an Account name (not customer name) of  'Own use'.
\par \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 The bar code own use can be printed out using the \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul print bar codes\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  option. A keyboard shortcut of ? enters the number 100003; typing a 6 followed by Tab completes the code for own use.
\par Note that the net figure in the \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul takings\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  report now includes own use purchases at cost, whereas in earlier versions, this figure excluded own use.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Receipts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Receipts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 6.9.\tab Receipts
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {receipt}}}{\v{\xe {F10}}}{\v{\xe {message}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Receipts are only printed after the sale is complete. When a receipt is required, press the 'Print Screen' key - the one labeled 'Print/SysRq' on most keyboards, at any time after the first item is sold, up until the sales screen is cleared. A receipt is printed out on the receipt printer selected in the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul settings\plain\f4\fs24  screen. . A receipt for a past sale can be printed by locating the sale in the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Tables|Sales\plain\f4\fs24 ' screen and pressing the 'Print Screen' key or clicking the Printer button.\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par The normal mode of operation is with a receipt only being printed on demand. If, however, a receipt is required after every sale, there is a checkbox option for this choice in the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul settings\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen.
\par There is also an option to print receipts whenever the sales total exceeds a fixed amount. Enter the amount in pounds in the box adjacent to the 'Receipts always' checkbox. \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 7.\tab Other till functions
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_paidout}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_paidout}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 7.1.\tab Paid outs
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {paid out}}}{\v{\xe {supplier}}}{\v{\xe {cheque}}}{\v{\xe {print cheque}}}{\v{\xe {authority}}}{\v{\xe {reason}}}{\v{\xe {parking}}}{\v{\xe {Windows}}}{\v{\xe {How do I pay for goods from the cash drawer?}}}{\v{\xe {cash limit}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 To pay money out to a supplier, press the Function key 'F9'. The screen shown below appears, if the operator has manager or owner authority.
\par The default entry is the Reason drop down box. Type in the reason for the payout. When the Paid out key is next activated, the reason will appear in the drop down box. Next, the amount, in pence, is typed in. Then press the Enter key to accept the entries. The cash drawer will then open.
\par Money paid into the cash drawer, say a refund from a supplier can be handled by a paid in. Simply hold the shift key down when pressing F9.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_NOSALE}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_NOSALE}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 7.2.\tab No sales
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {no sale}}}{\v{\xe {function key}}}{\v{\xe {F8}}}{\v{\xe {authority}}}{\v{\xe {cash drawer}}}{\v{\xe {password}}}{\v{\xe {How do I open the cash drawer?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The No sale dialog is activated by the function key 'F8'. A reason has to be entered or selected and on pressing the Enter key the cash drawer will open. A record of No sales along with the operators and their reasons will appear along with paid ins and paid outs in the reconcile cashups screen.
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Operatorlogin}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Operatorlogin}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 7.3.\tab Operator log in
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The operator pass can be scanned at the sales screen and the named operator will be changed for the next sale. \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par To log out, otherwise known as lock the screen, press the Scroll Lock key, or use the menu Payments>Lock!
\par If there are no keypresses for a period of time set on the Shop tab of the Settings screen, the sales screen is locked. This does not happen if the period is set to zero.
\par \plain\f4\fs24 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_nosale2}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_nosale2}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 7.4.\tab No sale
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 There are times when iot is necessary to open the cash drawer. This cannot be done during a sale, or when no operator is logged in. A record is kept in the sale table. A no sale is activated by pressing the key F8.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Lastsale}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Lastsale}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 7.5.\tab Last sale
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The last sale may be viewed by pressing the left arrow key. This is possible for all operators, but earlier sales are not visible for low authority (i.e. authority greater than 1) operators. Use the escape key to return to normal selling.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 8.\tab Embedded barcodes
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_embeddedbarcodes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_embeddedbarcodes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 8.1.\tab Embedded barcodes
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Some barcodes have the price or the weight encoded in the barcode; for a detailed description of this, see WikiAnswers. 
\par The most common formats are:
\par UPC-A: 2IIIIIVPPPPC
\par UPC-B & EAN-13: 02IIIIIVPPPPC
\par In these formats the "02" or "2" are the left-most digits of barcode. 
\par The 'I' characters are the item code, and the 'P' characters are the price or weight codes. The 'V' and 'C' are check digits.
\par It is not possible to enter such codes at the sales screen like other products, but if such a code is scanned into the 'New product' screen either from delivery or starting stock screens, then there is automatically an additional option available - to choose encoded by weight or by price. When one of these is chosen, the barcode is stripped down to the initial digits and then the rest replaced with zeroes. With price encoded products, the price entry is not relevant and a zero will be stored. For weight encoded products, the weight is specified in grams and the price entered should be the price per kilogram.
\par The encoded products can be examined in the 'Table|Encoded products' screen.
\par When sold via the sales screen, the normal actions of the Enter key to increase quantity by one, and to multiply by n by typing *n, do not work. Such products should always be scanned singly.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 9.\tab Bill payments
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_billpayments}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_billpayments}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 9.1.\tab Bill payments
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {Agency}}}{\v{\xe {Bill payments}}}{\v{\xe {Excluded}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 In the UK there is a service called PayPoint that many shops participate in, that allows money to be collected for various bill payment facilities. There are also competitors who offer a similar service, and no doubt the same sercice is offered in other countries. The money collected is not a part of the shop's turnover; the shop is collecting it on behalf of service as an agent and for this reason, the payments are refered to in ProffittCenter as Agency payments. They are identified by being given a tax code of 6 - Excluded. The term Excluded can be re-named, but the ID must remain unchanged. Any product with an Excluded tax rate will not be included in the shop's takings and a separate tally will be maintained in the Takings screen.
\par Commonly, a hotkey will be used, as the payments may be variable. We used the letter U for utility, so that to pay \'a310, one entered u1000.
\par When the money has been collected, the payment details are entered into the terminal provided by the service and the transaction completed. It is normally complicated to reverse a payment with the system, so it is important to collect the money before entering the details. For this reason, the amounts involved are shown after the sale is complete in the same space as the date is normally shown. 
\par Bill payments cannot be paid by cheque or debit card unless authorised by an owner or manager. For individual bill payments, the *n and blank entry (increase by one) will not work.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 10.\tab Offers
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_offer}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_offer}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 10.1.\tab Offers
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {pack offers}}}{\v{\xe {quantity discounts}}}{\v{\xe {offers}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Offers are desirable as a part of the overall offering of any shop. ProffittCenter has a range of offers that can be programmed by an owner or manager. Offers available are currently divided into three groups. These are \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul pack offers\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 , \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul quantity discounts\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  and \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul bin offers\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 . Further offer types may be added in future versions, creating the prospect of an extremely versatile system. The names of the types of offer are not very indicative, and a careful study of the implementation is necessary, if the offers facility is to be fully utilised.
\par There is an interaction between offers, and items sold using the @ function (price over) or a discount given using the % function. In general, if the reduced price is less than the normal price or the offer price, it will be maintained. If this is not true, the two different price reductions are not combined.
\par Where \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul customer discounts\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  are in force, these are combined.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_packoffers}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_packoffers}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 10.2.\tab Pack offers
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {pack offers}}}{\v{\xe {offers}}}{\v{\xe {BOGOF}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Pack offers are offers that apply to one or more products, where a discount is offered whenever a specified number of items are sold. This is best clarified by a few examples. Suppose we wish to sell four packs of Stella at a discount of 20p from the cost of four individual cans. This equates to 5p a can. However, if five cans are purchased, there is no discount given on the fifth can. If a discount were to be required on the fifth can, then a quantity discount is the required offer type. Another example would be the offer of buying any four bars from a range of six chocolate bars for a pound. This can be applied by giving an offer price of 25p to each of the six products. A range of products can be selected for the offer. Consider a cat food - there might be a range of six flavours all covered by the same offer.
\par To set up a pack offer, choose the menu selection Offers|Create and then choose Pack offer in the drop down box.
\par The required first product is scanned, or the alpha lookup function used. Pressing tab moves the focus to the quantity for the offer and then the limit. Leave the limit as zero if there is no limit. Limit values do not stop the sale of more items - they limit the number of items that can be bought at a discount. Additional items are sold at the full price. The normal price will be filled in when enter is pressed.. The offer price will be the price for the pack. In the example of the bars of chocolate above, this would be \'a31. Next, the start and end dates are selected by means of a drop down calendars. Offers only have effect between these dates. If more than one product is required for the offer, click the Add button (or type + in the product box) and then enter the additional product. It is not then be necessary to set a price for the offer. The offer will be automatically inactivated on the day after the end date. \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_quantitydiscounts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_quantitydiscounts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 10.3.\tab Quantity discounts
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {quantity discounts}}}{\v{\xe {offers}}}{\v{\xe {discount}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 Quantity discounts\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  are offers that apply to one or more products, where a discount is offered whenever a specified number of items are exceeded. The discount is specified as a percentage. This is best clarified by a few examples. Suppose we wish to sell four packs of Stella at a discount price of 80p when the normal price is \'a31. This equates to 20% reduction. If five cans are purchased, there will also be a discount on all five cans, unlike the pack offer. A range of products can be selected for the offer. Consider a dog food - there might be a range of five flavours, all covered by the same offer of 10p off when you buy three or more.
\par To set up a quantity discount, choose the menu selection Offers|Create and then choose Quantity discount in the drop down box.
\par The required first product is scanned, or the alpha lookup function used. Pressing enter moves the focus to the quantity for the offer and then the limit. Leave the limit as zero if there is no limit. Limit values do not stop the sale of more items - they limit the items that can be bought at a discount. The discount can then be filled in. Next, the start and end dates are selected by means of drop down calendars. If more than one product is required for the offer, click the plus button, and the system will fill in details for subsequent products. The offer will be \plain\f4\fs24\cf0 automatically\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  deactivated on the day after the end date, at program start up. Offers no longer in effect should be deleted using the Offers|View screen, as they can still slow the system down. 
\par For quantity discounts, it is possible to set the pack size to one. This is useful if you would like to put a special price onto an item as an offer, for a limited period.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_binoffer}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_binoffer}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 10.4.\tab Bin offer
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 A bin offer allows for the case when mixed items are sold for a fixed price such as any three of Mars products for 99p even though individual products may have varying prices.
\par To set up a bin offer, choose the menu selection Offers|Create and then choose Bin offer in the drop down box and then press enter. 
\par Select the first product by scanning or by the alpha lookup.
\par Pressing enter moves the focus to the quantity for the offer and then the limit. Leave the limit as zero if there is no limit. Limit values do not stop the sale of more items - they limit the items that can be bought at a discount.
\par Set the quantity to the number needed and the price to the total, and add extra products. In this case, quantity is three and price is 99p.
\par Then press the 'Plus' button to add further products, after entering the product barcode. \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_offers}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_offers}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 10.5.\tab Offers table
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {offers table}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This table shows the current offers table entries, and is shown when you click on the menu selection Offers|Show. Useful for checking. 
\par X is the threshold for applying an offer, and Y the discounted price. The start and end dates are just that. 
\par If it is necessary to delete an entry, due to an error in entry, or no longer being current, select the row with a mouse, and right-click and select delete offer.
\par The 'Add product' button will allow futher products to be added to an existing offer.
\par There are buttons for deleting an offer or deleting a product from an offer involving multiple products. Additional buttons allow the end date to be changed.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 11.\tab Orders
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_orderingprocess}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_orderingprocess}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 11.1.\tab The ordering process
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {ProffittCenter}}}{\v{\xe {orders}}}{\v{\xe {supplier}}}{\v{\xe {sell by date}}}{\v{\xe {yield}}}{\v{\xe {return on investment}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Ordering with ProffittCenter introduces a number of unique ideas to generate orders with an uncanny intelligence. After using the system for some time, one really begins to believe that the system knows best. Before that time, there is ample opportunity to modify and adapt generated orders, so you never loose control.
\par The first innovation is the estimation of the stock level required. It is best to think of this with the aid of a concrete example. I will base one on my own experience; collecting goods from Booker Cash & Carry, three times a week. On Monday, Wednesday and Friday mornings, and also, occasionally, on Saturday morning. Sunday was our busiest day of the week. Clearly, a fixed level for re-ordering a product might have worked, but it would be sub-optimal. The best answer has to be to look at the past sales record to determine future requirements.
\par The way this is done is explained here. Consider going to Bookers on a Wednesday. The program knows the stock level when generating the order, and the day when fresh stock will be fetched (Friday), after this order is collected. It needs to calculate the number that might be sold between Wednesday morning and Friday morning, and to order a fresh case if this exceeds the number in stock. The best estimate of this number to be sold is obtained by looking at how many were sold in the same time period during the previous week. As this might have been exceptional, the number sold in the same time period two and three weeks before is also calculated, and the worst case (the maximum) selected. This alone would not have any predictive qualities, so in addition to this, three weeks from the previous year are selected, centred on the current time period, but sticking to the same days of the week. As a result of this, items that are seasonal will magically be re-ordered in time.
\par 
\par The second innovation is the integration or stock-checking with the ordering process. It was found in practice that a major reason for errors in orders was errors in stock levels. The worst of these is when a case has not been entered into the system on the previous delivery. In this situation, a second case would be collected, which is not only needlessly expensive, but creates shelf-life problems. To avoid this, each time an order is created, the stock levels of all ordered items should be counted. These levels can be corrected on the order form, and if necessary, the item can be deleted, or a fresh order generated with the corrected values. This has an added benefit in that the levels of stock for items that are ordered are generally low so that counting can be done quickly, and accurately. Once the levels are checked, the stock levels are time stamped, and so will not be included in the next regular stock take, so no additional time is taken.
\par 
\par The third innovation is the calculation of \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul yield\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 , or return on capital invested (roci). No other EPOS system that we know of will provide this vital figure. Yield is the effective return on investment obtained by investing in a particular line of stock. If you are ever in the position of being limited with the amount of cash that you can invest in stock, then common sense dictates that it should be invested in stock with the highest \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul yield\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 . This can be easily done with ProffittCenter. 
\par 
\par The fourth innovation is the calculation of a sell by date. This allows for the rejection of any stock at a cash and carry that will not be sold completely by it's expire date (sell by or use by date in UK).
\par 
\par This has all been explained with just one example. The process is just as applicable to daily milk deliveries, or monthly biscuit orders. Set up the supplier defaults correctly, and all situations are dealt with correctly. Understanding the ordering system is more complicated than with other systems, but is no more complicated to use once defaults have been correctly set up. So persevere and you business will benefit greatly.
\par The MinStockLevel in the stock record is also now included in the calculations. Do not use this as the default for ordering: a value of 1 is sufficient for general use.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_yield}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_yield}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 11.2.\tab Yield
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The yield, or return on capital invested, is the effective interest earned by investing money in stock, given the normal rate of sale. The rate of sale is calculated using the past five weeks, plus a five-week period the year before. Profit is calculated using the last known purchase price and the current selling price. Credit provided is effectively free capital and in cases where the product is likely to sell before being paid for, an arbitrary high value is quoted (10000), as calculation is not possible.
\par Yield can be used to decide whether to buy a product whenever the amount of capital available is limited. The cost of wastes is not used in the calculation.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_ordercreate}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_ordercreate}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 11.3.\tab Generating orders
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {order}}}{\v{\xe {supplier}}}{\v{\xe {default}}}{\v{\xe {greyed}}}{\v{\xe {past sale}}}{\v{\xe {milk}}}{\v{\xe {How do I create an order?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 After using the mouse to select \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul  Orders|Create\plain\f4\fs24 \'85 After selecting a supplier, the Order create form will appear. \plain\lang1024\f4\fs24 
\par \plain\f4\fs24 
\par If the supplier defaults have been set up correctly, the next four entries will be set correctly and the Enter key can be pressed to start the order generation process. If not, then see the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul order parameters\plain\f4\fs24  page. Pressing the OK button will generate an order.
\par Pressing the Cancel button or the Escape key will return immediately to the sales screen without generating an order.
\par The generated order may then be examined by selecting \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Order |View\plain\f4\fs24  on the menu bar.
\par As orders are generated based on past sales, it is not possible to correctly generate an order until there is a past sales history. There should be a minimum of three weeks sales records plus the delivery interval; daily orders such as milk will give correct results after three weeks but orders which are placed monthly will require seven weeks of sales history.
\par The generation of orders can be a lengthy process so do not run it from an active station.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_orderparameters}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_orderparameters}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 11.4.\tab Order parameters
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {delivery date}}}{\v{\xe {delivery time}}}{\v{\xe {credit}}}{\v{\xe {yield}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Days spare: this is the leeway in stock held. If trade never varied, this could be set to zero to guarantee that enough stock was held to meet all requirements. Even if customers were that reliable, it would mean that trade could never increase. Some experiment may be necessary but the default value of one day is a starting point. Keeping to this value for perishable stock will minimise waste; a higher value for stock with a long life and infrequent delivery will reduce out of stocks. It may be beneficial in some circumstances to increase this. We found that with boxed cakes being delivered on a fortnightly cycle, that on the second week the selection was very  poor. While this might be optimal as far as stock is concerned, customers purchasing cake expect a reasonable selection. We found we could increase the days spare stock to seven without seriously affecting waste. 
\par Delivery date: This is the date of the next delivery. Next delivery date: this is the date of the next delivery date after the delivery date. For instance, if going to Cash & Carry on a Wednesday morning, and intending to go again on Friday, enter the date for Friday. This is because we need to calculate how much stock to buy on Wednesday, to last through until Friday.
\par Week's credit: This value is needed to calculate the return on capital investment, labeled \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Yield\plain\f4\fs24 , in the resultant order. \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_orders}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_orders}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 11.5.\tab Orders
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {modify order}}}{\v{\xe {stock level}}}{\v{\xe {shelf}}}{\v{\xe {10000}}}{\v{\xe {alpha lookup}}}{\v{\xe {margins}}}{\v{\xe {memo}}}{\v{\xe {add product}}}{\v{\xe {How do I modify an order?}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Order screen is used to make changes to orders once they have been generated. It is opened from the menu command \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Orders |View\plain\f4\fs24 . After selecting a supplier, it shows the last order generated for that supplier. The lines in the order are initially in department order, but can be re-sequenced by pressing the yield order or department buttons.
\par Yield order is useful if it is necessary to delete items because of cash constraints. 
\par Department order is useful for stock level checking and forms a useful picking order for cash and carry. 
\par The order can be printed out onto A4 paper using the Print button; if a receipt printer is available, then a condensed form of the order can be printed on the receipt printer by pressing the 'Print' key. If any errors are found in the stock levels, double click on the line in error in the Shelf column. The value will be highlighted (go blue with normal colour schemes) and then the corrected value can be typed in the space, followed by the Enter key.
\par By selecting the No:' column, the number of cases ordered can be modified by over-typing.
\par Clicking on any other column in a row will highlight the whole row. This row can then be deleted by pressing delete on the keyboard. A similar effect is achieved by right clicking the mouse and selecting Delete, by left clicking with the mouse. 
\par The Total cost box shows the cost of the order including any sales tax.
\par The only remaining control is Quit which is self-explanatory. The order is not lost when it is pressed. The Escape key has the same effect. If all of the lines in an order are deleted, the order header is deleted when pressing Quit or moving to a different order. \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 12.\tab Deliveries
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_deliveryentry}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_deliveryentry}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 12.1.\tab Delivery entry
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {delivery}}}{\v{\xe {packs}}}{\v{\xe {price label}}}{\v{\xe {product price}}}{\v{\xe {margin}}}{\v{\xe {new pack}}}{\v{\xe {milk}}}{\v{\xe {How do I enter delivered goods?}}}{\v{\xe {CCD}}}{\v{\xe {scanner}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Delivery entry screen is accessible either by the menu option \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Delivery\plain\f4\fs24  or by pressing the function key F11.
\par The 'Select supplier' dialog is shown first. Select the supplier and then press the Enter key to accept.
\par The '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Select delivery\plain\f4\fs24 ' dialog then appears. This show a list of deliveries, identified by their delivery note numbers. Click on one of these and then press Enter or click the OK button. Alternatively, if this is a new delivery, type in the delivery note number (or code) and then click OK; you will then be asked to enter the (delivery note) date.
\par The 'Delivery entry' screen then appears.
\par Then type or scan, the pack code. If the pack is recognised, the remaining boxes are filled in, and entry moves to the Number of packs box with a default value of one. If more than one pack is delivered, type in the number followed by the Enter key. If it is not recognised, the system will issue an error beep. Enter the code a second time to bring up the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul new pack\plain\f4\fs24  screen. Entering the code twice avoids the creation of bogus codes when only a partial scan is completed. The pack codes entered may be the bar code on the pack, the supplier stock code, or an arbitrary code for your convenience. Both letters and numbers are acceptable.
\par For instance, for milk, we use the set of codes pas, 2pas, 4pas for one, two and four pint pasteurised milk. For newspapers, we found it convenient to use the single newspaper bar code as a pack code for a paper. This has the advantage that one is not caught out by new Bar codes at the point of sale. For frozen foods, we use the supplier stock codes shown on the invoice. This allows frozen food to be placed immediately into the freezer, prior to data entry. If an unrecognised code is encountered, it is necessary to retrieve a sample from the freezer to obtain the product bar code. For most other products, we use the pack bar code. It may not be possible to read this with a CCD scanner.
\par For most items obtained singly, other than milk, we have a policy of always buying in two at a time, as this will allow for sales to increase more easily with demand. We then entered a 2 before scanning the single item bar code. This scheme is extendible to higher numbers. The advantage of this, over just using the bar code, is that a common mistake is to scan a bar code after serving a customer without first pressing F11. Without the need for a preceding digit, the item will be recognised as a sale.
\par On pressing the Tab key, the focus moves to the Pack price box. Check this value to see if it has changed since the last delivery, and if it has, then type in the new wholesale price in pence, excluding VAT, followed by the Enter key. (Exclude VAT even if you are unregistered.)
\par Entry then moves to the Product price box. If this has changed, type in the new price in pence, followed by the Enter key. If a new price label is needed, press the function key, F10. (Note that the price label will be at the old price if the price has changed. Step through to the end to accept the entry and then scan the pack again before pressing F10.)
\par If you wish to maintain the margin after a price increase, type in the margin and press the Enter key to give a new price at the specified margin.\tab 
\par If the margin is out of range of the default department margin, a warning dialog will appear. The mouse can be used to go back to the Product price box if a change is needed. If not, pressing the Enter key again will enter the data into the database.
\par The Cancel button will cancel the current inputs but leave the screen active while the Quit button or the Escape key will return to the sales screen.
\par It is permissible to have a Number of cases value of zero. This allows the wholesale price to be updated without a delivery.
\par Pressing the Enter key will operate the OK button. The delivery is then entered into the delivery table and any changes made are updated.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_selectdelivery}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_selectdelivery}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 12.2.\tab Select delivery
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {deliveries}}}{\v{\xe {completed}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 When the menu function Tables>Deliveries is actioned, the first screen shown is Deliveries. This screen shows all of the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul deliveries\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  outstanding that have not been completed. The operator can select one of these and then click the OK button.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Delivery}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Delivery}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 12.3.\tab Delivery
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {'Completed'}}}{\v{\xe {delivery entry}}}{\v{\xe {Deliveries}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The 'Delivery' screen appears after selecting a delivery in the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Deliveries\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen and pressing the details button. It shows a table of stock that has been delivered and then entered via the '\plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Delivery entry\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 ' screen. A running total of the total cost of items listed is shown, and the operator can enter the equivalent total from an invoice in the 'Invoice total' box. The same is true for tax. There is also a 'Completed' checkbox to show that the delivery has been fully dealt with. When the default OK button is clicked, these values are saved.
\par If wholesale prices are entered during delivery entry, these are shown as Invoice total when the screen is opened. There will be times when the true price is not known when the delivery is received, and the prices entered will be the previous price, the price calculated using the default margin, or zero. In the delivery screen, prices can be corrected and ultimately, the two sets of figures should tally. Remember to operate the OK (tick) button to save any changes.
\par Note that completed deliveries will no longer appear as a choice when \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul delivery entry\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  is attempted.
\par At the top of the screen are buttons that can change the retail and wholesale (pack) price of the selected delivery line by clicking the appropriate button and then making the change. This allows for the correction of entries in line with the invoice, when this is delivered at a later date.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 13.\tab Stock
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_addtostock}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_addtostock}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 13.1.\tab Add to stock
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {delivery}}}{\v{\xe {add to stock}}}{\v{\xe {product}}}{\v{\xe {barcode}}}{\v{\xe {wholesale}}}{\v{\xe {pack size}}}{\v{\xe {supplier}}}{\v{\xe {alpha lookup}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Add to Stock screen is used to add products to the system where there is no purchase, such as free stock from visiting reps or replacement for faulty stock. 
\par This screen should never be used for general stock entry; instead use the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Delivery\plain\f4\fs24  screen, so that stock levels are checked, wholesale price, pack size and supplier are recorded.
\par The Add to stock screen is activated from the menu item '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Add to stock\plain\f4\fs24 '. Just scan or type in the bar code, or begin typing the name of the product and use the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul alpha lookup\plain\f4\fs24  procedure.
\par If the product is recognised, the product description will appear and the focus moves to the Quantity box. Type in the quantity, press Enter to move to the OK button and then press Enter again to accept. The stock levels will be amended. The screen can also be used to reduce the stock level by typing in a negative (minus) number. We have used this facility on occasion to transfer stock from multi-packs to single items. If the product is not recognised the focus returns to the Product ID' box and the system issues a long beep.
\par The screen is closed by pressing the Cancel button or by using the Escape key.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_startingstock}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_startingstock}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 13.2.\tab Starting stock
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {starting stock}}}{\v{\xe {1000 code}}}{\v{\xe {new product}}}{\v{\xe {hot key}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 This screen is activated from the menu with '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Starting stock\plain\f4\fs24 '.
\par Type or scan a new product code (twice to ensure no miss-scans) and the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New Product\plain\f4\fs24 ' screen will appear. 
\par Pressing the 10000 Code button will create an unused \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul 10000 code\plain\f4\fs24 , including the initial 10000.
\par Entering a single letter will create a new product for a \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul hot key\plain\f4\fs24 . Pressing the Quit button with the mouse or pressing the Escape key returns to the sales screen.
\par The Starting stock screen can be used for the initial entry of stock when you are starting out, but it should not be used generally; instead use the delivery screen.
\par When a new product is created, it will be assigned default Pack and PackSupplier records based on the defaults set in the department chosen.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_tempstock}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_tempstock}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 13.3.\tab Default stock
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {default}}}{\v{\xe {temp}}}{\v{\xe {unlink}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 All products should be assigned to a department other than the default department. If any have been left assigned to the default department, or 'unlinked' in the Propduct screen, they can be correctly assigned using default stock.
\par Select the menu item Stock>Default stock.
\par If there are any stock items assigned to the default department, the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New Product\plain\f4\fs24 ' screen will appear. The details for each product can be entered or modified followed by clicking the 'OK' button. Default products are examined in reverse order of creation, and each product should be defined before moveing on to the next. Items on the a,b and c keys are excluded.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_linkproducts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_linkproducts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 13.4.\tab Link products
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This screen allows you to link products simply. First select a department, then from the list of products shown, select the first and then click the Select button. Then click the second product and then click the second Select  button. Finally click the Link button.
\par Then the Link SKUs screen appears. When you link two products, there is one quantity for both; the default is to sum the two separate quantities. The figure may be changed if required. No loss will be recorded in this case.
\par Finally click the Link to first (or second) button. Both products will be linked to the SKU of the first (or second). Normally, choose the lower SKU number.
\par A single department may show too many different products to clearly see product that should be linked: the Alpha box allows a smart search, similar to the alpha lookup function, to reduce the number of products shown. For instance, if we start with the tobacco department, typing the first two or three letters of Lambert & Butler will reduce the selection to a handful of product. \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 14.\tab Stocktaking
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_STOCKTAKING}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_STOCKTAKING}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 14.1.\tab Stocktaking
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {stocktaking}}}{\v{\xe {theft}}}{\v{\xe {staff theft}}}{\v{\xe {record}}}{\v{\xe {deliveries}}}{\v{\xe {recording errors}}}{\v{\xe {rolling}}}{\v{\xe {date stamped}}}{\v{\xe {stock checks}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Accurate stocktaking is the most important element of a computerised stock control system. Scanning at the point of sale will eliminate almost all errors in stock purchased by customers but errors can be introduced by a number of other factors.
\par \pard\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'b7}}\plain\f4\fs24 {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Customer theft \endash  the most obvious source of errors
\par {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Staff theft \endash  often larger than customer theft
\par {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Failure to record stock when delivered
\par {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Recording stock deliveries more than once, or miss-keying the number of packs
\par {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Errors in pack sizes recorded
\par {\pntext\f1\'b7\tab}Miss-counts or recording errors during a stock-take
\par \pard\plain\f4\fs24 While theft levels are important information when running a shop, errors due to other effects can often disguise true theft levels. Errors in stock levels will also result in unnecessary out-of-stocks and over-ordering. The more effective the ordering system is at minimising the total stock levels, the more damaging stock level errors will be.
\par Consider the effect of the theft of say three bars of chocolate. Until the stock level is checked and corrected, the chocolate bars may never be ordered again.
\par The same problem can arise with routine stock-takes. Say there has just been a delivery of the same chocolate bars, and there are now 50 bars on the shelf. With a number this large it is fairly easy to make a mistake. Three under, and you will end up in the same situation and be convinced that there is a theft problem.
\par Data entry is also a problem. Extra key presses such as typing 77 instead of 7 can lead to significant errors. Entering a sheet of stock-take figures can lead to whole pages of errors when a single row is missed out.
\par The stocktaking methods used here have been evolved to reduce all these errors to a minimum.
\par First, all stock checks are date stamped. This allows for stocktaking on a rolling basis.
\par Second, stocktaking can be confined to items with a low stock count \endash  less than ten items. This allows for rapid stocktaking and few errors in counts. This does mean that if this method is used exclusively, slow moving stock with high counts may never be counted, but errors in slow moving stock do not impact on profitability to the same degree.
\par Third, a stock-take of lines ordered is routinely done. These tend to be mostly low numbers, and this eliminates over-ordering due to errors caused by not entering stock when delivered.
\par The result of these strategies is that most stock is stock-checked every month without much effort. Fast moving stock will be counted much more often.
\par The Stocktaking by Department>All screen can be activated by using the Alt-s combination.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_STOCKTAKE}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_STOCKTAKE}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 14.2.\tab Stock take
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {stock take}}}{\v{\xe {stock}}}{\v{\xe {product}}}{\v{\xe {quantity}}}{\v{\xe {date}}}{\v{\xe {shortage}}}{\v{\xe {loss}}}{\v{\xe {encoded}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The stock take screen is shown when the menu selection Stock|Stock take|All is selected. There are also options for stock taking a single product, a department, all stock of a single supplier, all stock with a zero, or with a negative level. There is also an option to stock take items with a quantity of less than 10. This option is sometimes useful as it avoids counting large numbers, as mentioned in the previous help page.
\par The Stock take screen shows a table of 26 entries with columns headed SKU (Stock Keeping Unit), Product, Quantity and Date.
\par The SKU and Product columns show the SKU ID and linked product description. Remember that when multiple products are linked by a common stock entry, that only one count is maintained. The product description shown is the one with the last recorded delivery.
\par The Quantity column shows the recorded stock quantity. Clicking on this column with the left-hand mouse button will open this quantity for editing. Simply over-type the new value and then press the Enter key. Any downward change in stock level will be recorded in the sales table as a positive \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul loss\plain\f4\fs24 . 
\par The Date column, which shows the date of the last stock take, will then change to the current date, and the item will cease to be displayed. 
\par When all the stock levels have been checked, clicking the All Checked button will change all of the dates to the current date and close the screen.
\par The Print button (or Alt P) prints the visible table on the default printer whereas the function key F10 will print to a receipt printer if fitted. The screen is closed after printing. Quit or escape close the screen in other cases.
\par Note that products can only appear in the stock take screen if the date they were last checked is before today's date. New products that have only been created today will not appear unless the quantity was never changed from the default of zero. Also \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul price encoded\plain\f4\fs24  and \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul weight encoded\plain\f4\fs24  products are excluded completely.
\par For each option, you can select either Default or All; Default will show a screen of 26 items, All will show a screen with all items, using scroll bars if needed. Use default for preference.
\par 
\par To do a routine stocktake:
\par 1  Use Default setting of the stocktake screen
\par 2  Press Print key to get a list of stock
\par 3  Check each quantity matches or write down correct quantity next to quantity
\par 4  Call up same stocktake screen - it will show same products
\par 5  Correct any wrong figures by typing into the quantity column and pressing Enter. The line will disappear.
\par 6  When all corrections have been made, press the All checked button. The scree will close
\par 7  Calling up the same screen again will show a different set of products, until they have all been checked.
\par Notes:
\par Stock level can change whilst counting is taking place, due to sales - this is why the default is a better choice than all - it limits the time taken. (default shows just 22 products)
\par Arrow keys can be used to navigate.
\par Any corrections will appear as Losses in the sales table.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_STOCKVALUE}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_STOCKVALUE}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 14.3.\tab Stock value
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {other's}}}{\v{\xe {value}}}{\v{\xe {our stock}}}{\v{\xe {other's stock}}}{\v{\xe {wholesale}}}{\v{\xe {VAT}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 This screen is activated by the menu command '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Stock value |All\plain\f4\fs24 '. There are two buttons \endash  Our stock and Other's stock. Clicking Our stock with the mouse will start the calculation of the total stock value at wholesale price without VAT. The displayed table can be used to identify gross errors - find which department is affected and then use the menu option '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Stock value |Department\plain\f4\fs24 ' to see which individual stock item is causing problems. The Other's stock button performs the same calculation on stock which is still owned by a supplier.
\par Cells in the displayed table may be selected with the mouse and then copied to the clipboard by the labeled button. They may then be pasted into a spreadsheet program such as Excel got further analysis or display.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 15.\tab Reports
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_takings}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_takings}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 15.1.\tab Takings
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {takings report}}}{\v{\xe {reports}}}{\v{\xe {takings}}}{\v{\xe {daily}}}{\v{\xe {weekly}}}{\v{\xe {monthly}}}{\v{\xe {yearly}}}{\v{\xe {Excel}}}{\v{\xe {graph}}}{\v{\xe {spreadsheet}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Under the menu heading Reports are a number of different reports. The first of these is Takings. This screen allows for a calculation of takings by daily, weekly, monthly or yearly periods.
\par To use it simply, choose the period, (daily, weekly, monthly or yearly) by clicking on the appropriate tab, then set the start date by clicking on the down arrow of the Start date box. This will reveal a small monthly calendar. A small left pointing arrow can be clicked to reach earlier months. By default, the date is set to the current day for the daily page, the current week starting on a Sunday for the weekly page, the current month starting on the first day for the monthly page and the current year starting on the first of January.
\par Then choose a department by clicking on the down arrow of the Department box and selecting a department. This allows calculation of the trade for any specific department to be determined. The next drop down box allows for the selection of a specific product within the department, for detailed analysis. Calculations can be done retrospectively for multiple periods, such as each month for the past year.
\par Then click on the Calculate button. The takings for the day, week, month or year will be calculated and displayed. When earlier dates are selected, more than one row of results will appear.
\par When completed, as shown by the cursor reverting from an hourglass to a pointer, the results can be printed, by clicking the Print button. 
\par Sometimes the calculations are quite lengthy but even if incomplete, the screen can always be cancelled by clicking the Cancel button or by pressing the Escape key.
\par All results exclude VAT except for the Sales column, which is gross. The Profit column is based on the current purchase price so will not be truly accurate if historical figures are calculated. Own use sales are based at wholesale purchase price. Returns and Losses refer to the selected department only. Agency takings are excluded from all takings figures. The columns for returns, wastes, etc. refer only to a selected department and not all sales.
\par If your interest is in the performance of a particular product or department over time, then using the desired interval, choose the page: monthly sale are generally the most useful. Then choose a starting date, and click the Calculate button. When the calculations are completed, use the mouse to select the figures of interest by clicking and dragging the mouse. 
\par The selected figures will be highlighted in blue with standard colouring. Click on the copy button and then open up your favourite spread sheet program. I have used Excel here. Select a starting point and then paste the figures into the spread sheet by pressing Control-V' key combination (or clicking the paste icon). A few steps more and the results can be converted into a graph of sales. Here showing an uncharacteristic rise.\plain\f5\fs24  \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par 
\par \plain\f5\fs24\cf0\b Cashing up\plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 This has now been transferred to the Cashing up screen on the reports menu.\plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Salesby}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Salesby}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 15.2.\tab Sales by
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Clicking on this option reveals four further options: sales by department, operator, quantity and value. Clicking on any of these leads to the same screen. An addition set of reports include wastes, losses, returns, charges, received on account and own use. Operation of each is fairly self-explanatory - just set a start date and an end date and then click OK. A report of all sales in the selected period is produced after a delay. 
\par The reports on discounts or priced over will only show the sales in which one or more products have been discounted or priced over, as this is the only information saved. If it is desired to know which item was affected, it will be necessary to examine the sales record and determine which prices have been altered from normal.
\par A print button is provided that will print out an image of the screen on the default printer. There is also a copy button that will appear after the ok button has been clicked. This will copy the whole of the displayed results to the clipboard. These values can then be pasted into a spreadsheet for subsequent analysis.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_salesReports}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_salesReports}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 15.3.\tab Sales reports
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {own use}}}{\v{\xe {not completed}}}{\v{\xe {agency}}}{\v{\xe {losses}}}{\v{\xe {wastes}}}{\v{\xe {returns}}}{\v{\xe {department}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 When the Reports heading on the menu bar is clicked with the mouse, a number of options are revealed.
\par '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Takings\plain\f4\fs24 ' and '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Cash up\plain\f4\fs24 ' are detailed elsewhere.
\par Own use shows all sales that have been charged to own use.
\par Agency show individual agency transactions.
\par Losses, Wastes and Returns show products that have been shown as lost on a stock count, or have been wasted or returned at the point of sale.
\par Selecting Department reveals a sub-menu that allows these same losses, wastes and returns to be restricted to just one department.
\par All of the results of these selections are shown in date and time order, with the most recent at the bottom of the screen. It can take some time to produce these results, so they should only be attempted during slack periods or after closing. They can be useful in tracking down errors when cashing up. Clicking the Cancel button or pressing the Escape key will close the Results screen.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 16.\tab Cashing up
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_thecashingupprocess}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_thecashingupprocess}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 16.1.\tab The cashing up process
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 At the end of each operator's shift, the money in the cash drawer needs to be checked. The standard process for this is for the operator to use the menu option 'Reports|Cash up'. A short printout is issued from the receipt printer and the cash drawer will open. This should be placed together with the cash for subsequent reconcilliation. This can either be in a separable cash tray, or in a bag or other suitable device.
\par Subsequently, the person responsible for cash should reconcile the cash amounts. They select the menu option 'Reports|Reconcile cashups' and select the cashup ID on the printout with the money from the list displayed. Then, after clicking the OK button, the money can be counted and the counts entered into the left hand column of boxes, as appropriate using the Tab key to step from box to box. The values can be typed in. When all of these amounts have been entered, click the 'Calculate' button.
\par The error in the cash amount is shown together with lists of 'Debits', 'Cheques', 'Coupons', 'Received on account' and 'Paid outs', and their totals. Check these all against the paperwork that should be with the cash. Any errors should be entered into the totals boxes for record. 
\par Finally click the 'Save' button. 
\par For the 'Float' - the cash put into the cash drawer at the start of a shift, there are two options. The first is to set the 'Float value' on the settings screen to some value in pence; so for a \'a325 float, set the value to 2,500. It is then expected that the float will be \'a325 every time the cashing up process is started. The second option is for the 'Float value' to be set to zero. When this is the case, at the start of a shift, the operator will be asked to enter the float value, in pence. Once this has been done, operators will not be asked again until 'Reports|Cash up' is activated. This is true even if the operators change during the day.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_cashup}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_cashup}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 16.2.\tab Cashing up
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {cashing up}}}{\v{\xe {cash up}}}{\v{\xe {float}}}{\v{\xe {agency}}}{\v{\xe {takings}}}{\v{\xe {debit}}}{\v{\xe {cheque}}}{\v{\xe {coupon}}}{\v{\xe {backup}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f2\fs24 On selecting 'Reports|Cashing up', a display of key figures is shown since the last cashing up. These are the total Takings, Charges, Agency sales, and the totals for Coupons, Debits and Paid outs. In addition, the sum of accounts charged is shown. These figures will include any tax taken. In addition, the start and end date and time for the cashing up period (Starting from the last time and ending now), and the operator who performed the cashing up. On clicking OK, the program closes down. To reconcile the takings, the cash, debits,coupons and Paid outs in the till should equal to the Takings figure less the Charges plus any Agency sales.  The figure for the takings for accounting purposes is taken from '\plain\f2\fs24\cf2\ul Reports|Takings\plain\f2\fs24 ' for the given period. The takings are counted and reconciled using the \plain\f2\fs24\cf2\ul Cashup reconcilliation\plain\f2\fs24  screen.
\par \plain\f5\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f2\fs16 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_cashupreconcilliation}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_cashupreconcilliation}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 16.3.\tab Cashup reconcilliation
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Selecting 'Reports|Cashup reconcilliation' will bring up a  list of the ID's of 'Cashups' that have not been reconciled. Choose one and then click OK, to bring up the cashup reconcilliation screen for that cashup.
\par Here you can start by reconciling the 'debits', 'cheques', 'coupons', 'received on accounts' and 'paid outs' against the paper record. Any unresolved discrepancy can be entered in the 'total' boxes below the columns.
\par Then, starting with \'a350 notes (subject to currency of course), enter the count of each note or coin in the appropriate  location, tabbing from space to space. (Shift Tab will take you back one step) When you have entered the figures for all of the cash in the cash drawer, click on the Calculate button. Then click on the 'Calculate float' button. 
\par The net error is shown on the screen. The error will be positive if the is too much cash in the cash drawer. The paper document associated with debits, cheques, etc should then be reconciled. If for any of these, reconcilliation proves impossible, the total figure for the item should be altered, so that at least the error is recorded.
\par When complete, click the 'Save' button to save the reconciled cashup in the database. reconciled cashups can be viewed later from the Tables menu. (Still to be implemented)
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_reconciledcashups}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_reconciledcashups}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 16.4.\tab Reconciled cashups
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The option 'Tables|Reconciled cashups' makes it possible to return to past cashups, but not to alter them. When activated, only reconciled cashups with recorded errors are show, but if you uncheck a the 'In error' checkbox, all previous reconciled cashups can be seen.
\par By clicking any line in the display and then clicking the 'Details' button, you can see all further details that were recorded.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_cashupselect}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_cashupselect}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 16.5.\tab Cashup select
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This simple dialog presents a list of unreconciled cashups, listing the ID, the till number and the date cashed up. Select the one you want with the mouse and then press the OK button or press Enter.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 17.\tab New records
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_newpack}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_newpack}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 17.1.\tab New pack record
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {new pack}}}{\v{\xe {new product}}}{\v{\xe {delivery }}}{\v{\xe {short codes}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Fill in the details of the pack. A Product ID, such as a bar code, can be scanned or typed in or a search of the Products database by typing in the first few letters selecting a product with the mouse. If the product is not recognised then the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New Product\plain\f4\fs24 ' screen will appear.
\par The Pack code on the first screen is the code entered in the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Delivery screen\plain\f4\fs24 ' except in the case of short codes where there is a strong chance that two manufacturers will use the same code. In this case, the code will be preceded by the Supplier ID followed by a '+' symbol. This creates a unique extended code for the pack; however, there is never any need to enter this extended code \endash  just stick to the short code on entry, and the extra characters will be added by the system. Pack codes are not necessarily restricted to numbers, to allow supplier stock codes to be used. These can normally be read from the invoice.
\par When the OK button is clicked, or the Enter key pressed, the new \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul PackSupplier\plain\f4\fs24  form is shown.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_newpacksupplier}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_newpacksupplier}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 17.2.\tab New pack supplier
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {pack}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f5\fs24\cf0 The new Pack Supplier Dialog is generated by the delivery screen when a new record must be created. This happens when a pack is new for the supplier selected. Only the price in pence has to be filled in. Press the Enter key to accept the entry or the Escape key to dismiss the screen without entry.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_newproduct}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_newproduct}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 17.3.\tab New product record
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {new product}}}{\v{\xe {sales}}}{\v{\xe {new pack}}}{\v{\xe {product ID}}}{\v{\xe {description}}}{\v{\xe {alpha lookup}}}{\v{\xe {KitKat}}}{\v{\xe {price}}}{\v{\xe {VAT}}}{\v{\xe {temporary product}}}{\v{\xe {Delivery entry}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The New Product screen will appear if an attempt to sell an unknown product is made using the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Delivery entry\plain\f4\fs24  screen; or if an unknown product is placed in a \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New Pack\plain\f4\fs24  Screen; or if the menu item '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Stock |Starting stock\plain\f4\fs24 ' is activated and a new product code is scanned in.
\par The screen will appear with the Product ID' filled in and the focus on the Description box. Type in a convenient description. Remember that the description is used in the Alpha lookup so the third character should be a letter or a space and not a number. After pressing the Enter key, the focus moves to the Department drop down box and the first character of each word in the description is capitalised so there is generally no need to enter capitals. Select the desired department using the mouse or the up/down arrow keys. After pressing the Enter key, pressing the down arrow on the Stock box will reveal an alphabetically ordered list of products. If the new product is to be linked to one of these, select it with the mouse. Products are linked if a common count is to be maintained. For instance, a price marked KitKat bar would be linked to an unmarked KitKat bar. If it is a totally new product, leave this box blank. Then press the Enter key and the focus will move to the Price box. Enter the price in pence followed by the Enter key.
\par The focus moves to the Priced check box. This indicates that, when ticked, that the product is price marked. It is ticked by left clicking with the mouse, or by pressing the space bar
\par The box labeled Per is intended for a column \'a3xx.xx per 'metre' or similar.
\par If you continue to press the Enter key without filling in a department, the product is created as a temporary product and the rest of the information can be added later with the Starting stock screen.
\par If possible, it is better to fill in the details, as this will ensure the correct VAT treatment and stock level adjustment when the product is sold. 
\par When the Enter key is pressed with the Stock drop-down box blank, the '\plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New Stock Screen\plain\f4\fs24 ' will appear.
\par Pressing the Quit button or pressing the Escape key will return to the previous screen without saving any entries.
\par There is occasional confusion with price \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul encoded products\plain\f4\fs24  - some products appear to have codes that might otherwise be price encoded. Products that are encoded can be set to encoded by price or encoded by weight but those that are neither can be left as 'not encoded. The encoded state is set prior to displaying the New product screen. The codes for encoded product are not entirely standard, having been set for internal use only. The 8th bit should be a parity bit but some implementations make this bit significant for product identification. In this case, the Parity checkbox should be unchecked for encoded products.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_newsku}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_newsku}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 17.4.\tab New stock
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {stock}}}{\v{\xe {quantity}}}{\v{\xe {default supplier}}}{\v{\xe {default case size}}}{\v{\xe {department}}}{\v{\xe {VAT rate}}}{\v{\xe {excluded from stock take}}}{\v{\xe {included in stock take}}}{\v{\xe {other peoples stock}}}{\v{\xe {video}}}{\v{\xe {stopped}}}{\v{\xe {new stock}}}{\v{\xe {description}}}{\v{\xe {VAT}}}{\v{\xe {excluded}}}{\v{\xe {included}}}{\v{\xe {default}}}{\v{\xe {photocopies}}}{\v{\xe {linked}}}{\v{\xe {stock minimum}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Stock quantity box would normally be left at zero for new stock if this dialog has been generated by a stock entry procedure. If it has been generated from the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul sales screen\plain\f4\fs24  or from \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul starting stock\plain\f4\fs24  entry, the value can be filled in.
\par Stock minimum is normally set to zero. A higher value should ensure that the stock level should never fall below that value.
\par The Default case size and Default supplier are used to enable ordering of stock that did not originally arrive in a case, such as where a rep leaves a few bars of a new line of chocolate. Filling these in will ensure that they will be re-ordered when the stock is gone.
\par The Department is self-explanatory; after selection, the Vat rate will be set to the default for the department. If this is not correct, then change it as required. A separate Vat rate has been set up for video rental (or services), even though these incur standard rate in the UK.
\par The next drop down box allows a choice between four options; Excluded from stock take, Included in stock take (the default), Other peoples stock, and Videos. Most stock is of course included in any stock take. The option Other peoples stock, allows for a separate value to be calculated for stock that is put into the shop but not paid for until sold. Videos for rent have to be treated separately, as a rental does not decrease the stock level. Certain other items have to be excluded from any stock take. One example would be photocopies.
\par Move between fields using the Tab key and press the Enter key to accept all of the values entered. Escape will close the screen without accepting any values.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_supplier}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_supplier}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 17.5.\tab Supplier
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {Suppliers}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The supplier screen is displayed from th \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Suppliers\plain\f4\fs24  screen by clicking the 'New' button or by selecting a supplier and clicking 'Details'. The Default supplier cannot be modified. The box labeled Weeks credit is straightforward. It is used in the calculation of yield. Yield is a calculation of return on money invested, and clearly, the only money invested that is of concern to retailers is their own money.
\par The box labeled Days to next delivery is the number of days between successive deliveries. If a supplier delivers just once a week, the entry will be 7. If deliveries are more than once a week, leave this entry blank.
\par The box labeled Days spare stock is set to indicate just how much stock will be sitting on the shelf just prior to the next delivery. A figure of one is a practical minimum, because of the variation in buying patterns of customers. Higher values can be of use when suppliers make infrequent deliveries. A low figure can only be tolerated with accurate stock level figures. Lack of diligence in stocktaking can result in products never being ordered.
\par The final entries are a row of check boxes labeled to represent the days of the week on which deliveries are made. For milk deliveries on six days a week, Monday to Saturday, simply click on all but the first button.
\par Note that by setting up the entries correctly, the ordering process is almost automatic but you may need to modify the order parameters if there is a break in the normal routine of deliveries, say for a Bank Holiday.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 18.\tab Tables
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_deliveries}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_deliveries}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.1.\tab Deliveries
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {deliveries}}}{\v{\xe {'Delivery'}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This screen available from the Tables menu, shows all \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul deliveries\plain\f3\fs20\cf0  \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 starting with the most recent. Selecting on and clicking the default 'Details' button will show the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul 'Delivery'\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen with more detail. \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Delivery}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Delivery}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.2.\tab Delivery
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {'Completed'}}}{\v{\xe {delivery entry}}}{\v{\xe {Deliveries}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The 'Delivery' screen appears after selecting a delivery in the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Deliveries\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen and pressing the details button. It shows a table of stock that has been delivered and then entered via the '\plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Delivery entry\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 ' screen. A running total of the total cost of items listed is shown, and the operator can enter the equivalent total from an invoice in the 'Invoice total' box. The same is true for tax. There is also a 'Completed' checkbox to show that the delivery has been fully dealt with. When the default OK button is clicked, these values are saved.
\par If wholesale prices are entered during delivery entry, these are shown as Invoice total when the screen is opened. There will be times when the true price is not known when the delivery is received, and the prices entered will be the previous price, the price calculated using the default margin, or zero. In the delivery screen, prices can be corrected and ultimately, the two sets of figures should tally. Remember to operate the OK (tick) button to save any changes.
\par Note that completed deliveries will no longer appear as a choice when \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul delivery entry\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  is attempted.
\par At the top of the screen are buttons that can change the retail and wholesale (pack) price of the selected delivery line by clicking the appropriate button and then making the change. This allows for the correction of entries in line with the invoice, when this is delivered at a later date.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_department}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_department}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.3.\tab Department
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The Department screen is displayed from Departments either by clicking the 'New' button or by selecting a department and clicking the 'Modify' button.
\par The first field is the department description, a field that is capitalised after stepping on with the Tab key. Next is a tax drop-down box. Choose the default tax for this department using the arrow keys. Tab to the next field and select the default supplier for goods in this department. The next field, 'Default margin', is the expected percentage on return (por) for this range of goods. The default minimum specifies a minimum stock level, but leave this as zero for best use of the system.
\par Restriction is either an age, say 18 for alcohol, or the letter P for pharmacist permission with UK law. Click the OK button to accept the new or changed department or use the Escape key to dismiss the screen.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_departments}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_departments}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.4.\tab Departments
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {department}}}{\v{\xe {Temp A}}}{\v{\xe {Temp B}}}{\v{\xe {agency}}}{\v{\xe {video}}}{\v{\xe {default}}}{\v{\xe {retail}}}{\v{\xe {wholesale}}}{\v{\xe {restricted}}}{\v{\xe {pharmacy}}}{\v{\xe {P+}}}{\v{\xe {18+}}}{\v{\xe {age restricted products}}}{\v{\xe {'Tracked'}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The department table is modified by selecting the menu item Tables|Departments with the mouse.
\par The empty database is provided with a default department. Fresh departments can be added to suit a wide variety of stores by clicking 'New'. The department Temp A' should not be deleted, as it is the default for non-coded items. The departments Agency and Video have special significance, and should not be changed, but may be deleted if not required. The descriptive field may be changed if required. Use the New button to create a new department with a unique ID, and then save it by clicking the OK button. The margin is the retail margin used to calculate a wholesale price, prior to recording a genuine wholesale price.
\par Products within a department that is restricted can be identified by characters in the Restriction field.  For age restricted products, enter the Restriction with the age such as "18" Two digits are allowed for the age, so if only one is required, make the second one a space. Another option is for pharmacy use. In the UK, some pharmacy products can only be sold with the pharmacists approval. These are indicated by the restriction " P". Restricted products will result in a request for pharmacist approval after a warning sound. Pressing the enter or y key is all that is required to continue with the sale. Pressing n for no will stop the sale of that item.
\par The third sort of restriction is \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul 'Tracked'\plain\f4\fs24  items, identified by the letter 'T' in the restriction field.
\par \tab 
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_hotkeys}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_hotkeys}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.5.\tab Hotkeys
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 A table of hotkeys in use is displayed by this menu selection. There is no new button but new hotkeys can be created by entering a letter in the 'Stock|Starting stock' screen.\plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 If you need to re-assign a hotkey to a different product, look at the details, and then #Unlink' the product. The hotkey will then appear in 'Stock|Temp stock' ready to be re-named or linked to another product.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_operator}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_operator}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.6.\tab Operator
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {operator}}}{\v{\xe {ID}}}{\v{\xe {privileges}}}{\v{\xe {managers}}}{\v{\xe {staff}}}{\v{\xe {takings}}}{\v{\xe {cashing up}}}{\v{\xe {trainee}}}{\v{\xe {locked}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 This screen is activated from the Tables|Operators menu item and then clicking New or Details. The authority ratings run from 0 to 5. 
\par 0. The operator has full privileges \endash  reserved for owners.
\par 1. The operator has almost the same privileges; for use by managers.
\par 2. Senior staff member with addition rights to input deliveries.
\par 3. Staff member with right to input deliveries.
\par 4. Trainee staff member. Not actively allowed  to complete sales, but the sales screen if functional for training.
\par 5. The till is locked to prevent unauthorised use.
\par The Print button is used to print out details, including a bar code using the default printer, suitable for laminating to make a staff pass.
\par Printed passes will have a preceding 1000037 so that the pass will be recognised by the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul sales screen\plain\f4\fs24 .
\par Once you have created an additional operator, and at least one of these has owner or manager status, you can change the authority of the Default operator to 6.
\par In addition, you can allow any operator additional permissions by ticking the appropriate check box.
\par In addition, each operator can have privaleges ascribed. This allows a shopkeeper to decide what activities each member of staff can perform on a case by case basis.
\par Managers can do all activities except modify Operators, without additional permission.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_operators}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_operators}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.7.\tab Operators
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {'Product'}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Display a list of all operators by clicking 'Tables|Operators'. Then you can click the 'New' button, or select an operator and then press the 'Details' button to display the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul 'Product'\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_packs}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_packs}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.8.\tab Packs
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {pack}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 The Packs screen show the basic details for pack codes. These records are created by the Delivery screen.
\par The box labeled Product allows the operator just see Packs that contain a desired product by entering or scanning a product code and pressing the tab button. The same can be done for an SKU. Remember that there may be more than one pack for each product. There are buttons to delete selected Packs. As a Pack cannot be deleted when there are linked Pack supplier records, there is a separate button to delete these records first.\plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_packsuppliers}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_packsuppliers}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.9.\tab Pack supplier
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {pack supplier}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f5\fs24\cf0 The\plain\f10\fs24\cf0  Pack suppliers screen allows examination of Pack Supplier records. These records are created by the Delivery screen. Records can be deleted from the Packs screen if they are in error.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_paidouts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_paidouts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.10.\tab Paid Outs
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This displays a table of all paid outs. The paid outs are shown just for the till queried unless the till ID is zero in which case all paid outs are shown. Once started, set the start date and end date before clicking the OK button. The table can be sorted by clicking on any of the headers of the table. It is not possible to modify or delete entries.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_product}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_product}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.11.\tab Product
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {product}}}{\v{\xe {alpha lookup}}}{\v{\xe {starting stock}}}{\v{\xe {purchases}}}{\v{\xe {relational}}}{\v{\xe {price change}}}{\v{\xe {Settings}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Product details are selected by left clicking the menu item Tables|Product with the mouse.
\par Locate the required product by typing or scanning the product's bar code or by typing in three or more letters of the product description and selecting with a mouse click, using the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Alpha lookup screen\plain\f4\fs24 . Details of the product can then be changed such as the product description and then clicking 'Update'.Clicking the Price change button can modify the selling price of a product. The details of the SKU that is linked to the product can also be modified by clicking on the 'SKU' button. These details are the entries below the line in the Product screen.
\par Pressing the Print key will print out a shelf edge label(TODO). Pressing the Print bar code button will print out an adhesive bar code label on an attached bar code printer selected in the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Settings\plain\f4\fs24  screen. 
\par A useful technique when a stock code has been wrongly assigned is to change the stock code to the code for a temporary product. This can be done easily by clicking the unlink button. A new stock code can then be assigned by using the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Starting stock\plain\f4\fs24  Screen.
\par It is not possible to delete a product, or modify a product ID once it has appeared is the sales table because of the relational integrity required. 
\par \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Products}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Products}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.12.\tab Products
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {Product}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The Products table is shown by selecting the menu item Table|Products.
\par A table of all products in the system is shown, in 'barcode' order. You can order them by description or by department by clicking on the appropriate column headers.
\par To find further details of a particular product, select the product with your mouse and then click the 'Details' button which will show the \plain\f3\fs24\cf2\ul Product\plain\f3\fs24\cf0  screen. 
\par If you select a product and then click  'Sell', or just press the Enter key, the product will be sold, just as though you scanned it.
\par Dismiss the screen by clicking the button with a small button marked x or by pressing the Escape key.
\par There is also a button  for printing a barcode on a dedicated barcode printer. This can be used with a multiple  selection if required.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_sale}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_sale}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.13.\tab Sale
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {sales}}}{\v{\xe {past sales}}}{\v{\xe {F10}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Sale screen, reached by the menu option Tables|Sale, allows a record of past sales to be examined. Forward and backward buttons allow stepping through sales in sequence. Alternatively, a particular sale can be selected in the 'Tables|Sales' menu selection, and then the Details buton clicked. Any sales record can be printed by pressing the Print button.
\par An operator cannot modify any of the details of past sales.
\par Individual sales records will show if a sale was cash, charged, own use, a return, a loss, a waste or received on account. 
\par Tracking information is displayed alongside the price when it exists.(TODO)\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_sales}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_sales}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.14.\tab Sales
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The Sales screen is displayed by clicking 'Tables|Sales' and shows the last thousand sales for a particular till. If the zero till is selected, then all sales are shown. Further information can be obtained by selecting a particular sale and then clicking Details.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Salestaxes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Salestaxes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.15.\tab Sales taxes
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The sales tax modify screen is straightforward. The tax rates are set up initially for the UK, so that users abroad may need to change these. A separate tax rate for rental (Video) is included even though this is the same as the standard rate in Britain, as this allows for a separation of the takings, from normal sales.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Sku}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Sku}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.16.\tab SKU
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {stock}}}{\v{\xe {SKU}}}{\v{\xe {stockID}}}{\v{\xe {yield}}}{\v{\xe {return on investment}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The Stock modify screen shows the stock record associated with products.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst{INCLUDEPICTURE "SKU.bmp" MERGEFORMAT}}}
\par The stock record is referred to as the SKU or stock keeping unit as it is this record that keeps a record of the number of items in stock, here referred to as the Stock quantity. There is a facility to jump to any required record by typing in a Sku ID into the lookup box and pressing the tab key.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_suppliers}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_suppliers}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.17.\tab Suppliers
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {credit}}}{\v{\xe {supplier}}}{\v{\xe {spare}}}{\v{\xe {default}}}{\v{\xe {milk}}}{\v{\xe {Monday}}}{\v{\xe {Saturday}}}{\v{\xe {deliveries}}}{\v{\xe {Bank Holiday}}}{\v{\xe {paid out}}}{\v{\xe {delivery}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 The Suppliers screen is reached by the menu option Tables|Suppliers.
\par Clicking the New button with the left-hand mouse button will create a new record with details that can be filled in using the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Supplier\plain\f4\fs24  screen.
\par The 'Details' button will display the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Supplier\plain\f4\fs24  screen for the select supplier.. \plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_tax}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_tax}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.18.\tab Tax
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 The Tax screen allows the tax rate to be amended. Click OK to accept any changes. The description and symbol fields are not held in the database but are taken from the properties file. If you need these to be changed, contact ProffittCenter by email with the fields that you want.\plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_taxes}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_taxes}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.19.\tab Taxes
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Selecting 'Tables|Taxes causes the Taxes screen to be displayed showing the description, rate, symbol and code are displayed for each entry. Initially, the data is set up for UK VAT rates, but these can be modified by selecting and then clicking the Details button. The symbol is the indication given on receipts and is a single character. Code is the ID in the table.
\par When an entry is select with the mouse, the tax rate can be modified by clicking the Modify button.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Tracking2}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Tracking2}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 18.20.\tab Tracking
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {tracking}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This option will show the tracked items purchased by a selected customer. If the customer number is known, enter it in the edit box, but if not, just click the OK button, to show the customers screen.
\par A customer id is selected by double clicking, and then the tracking view screen is shown. If more than one item has been purchased, the others can be reached by clicking on the VCR type control.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 19.\tab Accounts
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_customer}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_customer}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 19.1.\tab New customer
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {customer}}}{\v{\xe {new}}}{\v{\xe {video}}}{\v{\xe {member}}}{\v{\xe {default}}}{\v{\xe {telephone}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Customer records are stored for one of three purposes. The first is to operate a video club and the second is to allow for credit and the third to keep track of customers when service or returns are a required part of the business. 
\par New customers can be enrolled with the Customers menu selection \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 and then clicking 'New'. \plain\f4\fs24 Customer numbers by default start at 1000380001, upwards. \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 The customer number is filled in automatically. 
\par The details of existing customers can be viewed by selecting and then clicking 'Details'.
\par 
\par \plain\f4\fs24 This will be used later to allow membership cards to be scanned into the sales screen. The fields can be stepped through using the Tab key. Names, street names etc. are capitalised on exit. There is provision for two telephone numbers, and \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 provision for a second card holder with a different name\plain\f4\fs24 .
\par The print bar code button allows a membership card to be printed. The print is onto the default printer, using a small note size piece of paper. After being signed, this can be folded in half, trimmed with scissors, and then sealed with a credit card size laminating machine. The use of heat sealing to laminate the card stops a thermal receipt printer being used, so the cards are printed on the default printer.\plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par The details to be filled in are self explanatory. For video club members there is provision for a second card holder with a different name. All entries will be capitalised, so stick to lower case for maximum convenience. \plain\f9\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_customers}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_customers}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 19.2.\tab Customers
\par\keepn
{\v{\xe {member}}}{\v{\xe {name}}}{\v{\xe {street}}}{\v{\xe {postcode}}}{\v{\xe {customers}}}\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 Select the menu item Customers and then choose between By name, or By  number. Customers will be listed in the specified order in tabular form. Use the scroll bar to move beyond the visible list. Select any line and then click the 'Details' button to see customer details. With this selected, the full details of the customer with the option to print a new membership card for an account is shown. Details can be altered and then saved by clicking the OK button. One option that can be changed is the stop tick box. Ticking this will stop further goods being taken by customers with unpaid bills. 
\par The same form, sorted by name is shown when the customer select number, \plain\f5\fs24\cf0 1000380000\plain\f4\fs24  is entered at the sales screen, or a 'charge' or 'received on account' is requested without first selecting a customer. A member can be selected by clicking on a name with the mouse and then clicking the OK button; or scanning an account button. 
\par Bear in mind that the Data Protection Act in the UK, and similar regulations elsewhere, may mean that personal data cannot be shared with other customers at the counter without the consent of the person involved.
\par The same form is used to select a customer: just scroll through and click on a customer and then press the Enter key. You can also scan or type in a Customer code followed by Tab or Enter.
\par To charge a sale to a customer, simply scan the customer barcode at some time during the sale, or using 'Customers|Customers by name', select the customer and then press the Enter key. Finally Charge the customer account by scanning the 'Charge' barcode or typing 1000034 followed by Tab or Enter.
\par To refund a customer for returned goods, scan as normal and then press the - (minus) key followed by the Tab or Enter key. The goods will be returned to stock.  To return all the items 'sold' so far, press the minus key and then holding down the shift key, press Enter. Finally charge this to the previously selected customer by scanning the 'Charge' barcode.
\par If at any time the Charge barcode is scanned without selecting a customer, the 'Customers by name' screen appears and you can select a customer at that stage with a mouse followed by the Enter key. With the 'Customers by name' screen visible, it is still possible to scan a customer barcode for selection.
\par To make a payment off an account, with a customer selected, scan the 'Received' barcode or type 1000035 followed by Tab or Enter. The account balance will be shown as a total, and any amount paid in may be typed in. If this is just an enquiry, enter a zero followed by enter. It is possible to pay money into an account, when no money is owed. Simply press the shift key when pressing the Enter key. To return money paid in this way without purchasing goods, do an enquiry as above, but then type zero, and then hold the shift key down as you press enter.
\par The screen can also be manipulated entirely by keyboard characters: use the up and down arrows to move the selection up and down, or the page up and page down to jump through the customer names. Use the + sign to create a new customer and Control-I key to see customer details of a selected customer. If a customer barcode is scanned, this is returned as a customer number.\plain\f9\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f4\fs24 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Accounts}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Accounts}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 19.3.\tab Accounts
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f4\fs24 For products that are charged, sell as normal and then scan the charged bar code or type \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000034\plain\f4\fs24  followed by the enter key or use the menu option 'Payment|Charge'. If a customer has not been defined, the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul Customers screen\plain\f4\fs24  is displayed. Select the name of the desired customer with the mouse and then press the OK button. A new customer entry can be created clicking the \plain\f4\fs24\cf2\ul New customer\plain\f4\fs24  button. 
\par Subsequently, accounts must be paid for if you are to remain in business. On an empty sales screen, scan the received on account bar code, type \plain\f8\fs24\cf0 1000035 or use the menu option 'Payment|Received on account'. The \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul Customers\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  screen will be displayed to select the correct customer. Alternatively, a customer account card with a customer number as a barcode can be scanned, to obviate the need to select a customer. Then the outstanding balance will be shown and any amount may be tendered to reduce this. Any balance will be carried forward. If zero is entered as a tender, the sales screen is cleared, allowing for a quick account balance check.
\par The bar codes for charged and received on account can be printed out using the \plain\f8\fs24\cf2\ul print bar codes\plain\f8\fs24\cf0  option.
\par Two keyboard shortcuts are provided for these functions: < (cash in, received on account) for received on account and > (goods out, charged) for charged.
\par \plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_balance}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_balance}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 19.4.\tab Balance
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Selecting 'Customers|Balane' on the menu brings up the 'Customer by name' screen which is used to select a customer. Select one by clicking and then press the OK button to display the 'Balance' screen.
\par This shows a list of outstanding items purchased, and money received on account, together with the sale ID. At the bottom is the total charged and the total received since the account was opened, and the balance outstanding. Clear with the Escape key or clicking the Close button marked with a small x.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_balances}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_balances}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 19.5.\tab Balances
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 This screen shows a list of all customers and their total charged, received and their net balance. Selecting a customer and clicking details will display the 'Balance' screen for that customer.\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs24\cf0 
\par\pard
\page \par \pard\plain \s1\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs36 20.\tab Networking
\par\keepn
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Creatinganetwork}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Creatinganetwork}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 20.1.\tab Creating a network
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Before networking ProffittCenter, you need to set up a network. With Microsoft XP, this is not difficult, and will not be described here. However, the network should be stable, and you should be able to 'see' any computer from any other computer on the network. If access seems to be blocked, do not forget to check whether any installed firewalls are causing problems. Once you have created a satisfactory network, there are a number of steps that you need to take to set up a fully functioning ProffittCenter network, and these are detailed in the 'Setting up a Network' section of the ProffittCenter Manual (Network Edition)\plain\f5\fs20\cf0 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f3\fs20\cf0 
\par\pard
{\*\bkmkstart _topicpageref_Settingupanetwork}{\*\bkmkend _topicpageref_Settingupanetwork}\par \pard\plain \s2\keepn\tx1200\b\f6\fs32 20.2.\tab Setting up a network
\par\keepn
\par \plain \keepn\f0\fs20 
\deflang2057\pard\plain\f2\fs24 Setting up a network is an extensive subject and I have not come up with a definitive answer. This note is just to relate my own experience.
\par 1.  You need to have a network set up with a router. I have a wireless router supplied by TalkTalk. The server (main computer) is wired in. The router can be reached by typing 192.168.1.1 into the address bar of my  browser. Everything left on default settings.
\par 2.  Each computer has an assigned name. 
\par 3.  In your firewall, open port 3306 on server on each client machine. This is straightforward in Windows firewall.
\par 4.  On the server, bring up the XAMPP control panel and make sure that MySQL and Apache are both running.
\par 5.  On the server start ProffittCenter Pro and use 'localhost' for server name. The database name is till, the User name is root, and the password is the one you have set.
\par 6.  Make a note of the other computer names. Find these by right clicking on My Computer and selecting Properties.
\par 7.  On the server, log into XAMPP by putting localhost into the address bar of a browser, and then start phpMyAdmin.
\par 8. Under 'Privileges', create a new User for each other computer, using the computer name as a user name and making a note of the passwords (required).
\par 9. Now, in ProffittCenter Pro, on each other computer, under Settings, Make the Server name the computer name of the server, the User name is the name of the current computer, and the password is the one we just created for that user name. The database remains till. Check that you get a connection.
\par 10. Well, if everything works, your home and dry. If not, please get in touch although you should expect to pay for anything more than basic help on this.\plain\f5\fs20 \
 \
 \
 \plain\f2\fs24 
\par\pard
\page
\par Your index page goes here...
\par
\par In MS-Word, select INDEX AND CONTENTS from the INSERT menu.
\par Select INDEX and click OK.
}
